Down the Rabbit-Hole
Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the
bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into
the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or
conversations in it, “and what is the use of a book,” thought Alice
“without pictures or conversations?”
So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the
hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of
making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and
picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran
close by her.
There was nothing so very remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it
so very much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, “Oh
dear! Oh dear! I shall be late!” (when she thought it over afterwards,
it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the
time it all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit actually took a
watch out of its waistcoat-pocket, and looked at it, and then hurried
on, Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she
had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a
watch to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the
field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a
large rabbit-hole under the hedge.
In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how
in the world she was to get out again.
The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then
dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think
about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very
deep well.
Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had
plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what
was going to happen next. First, she tried to look down and make out
what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she
looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with
cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures
hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves as she
passed; it was labelled “ORANGE MARMALADE”, but to her great
disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear
of killing somebody underneath, so managed to put it into one of the
cupboards as she fell past it.
“Well!” thought Alice to herself, “after such a fall as this, I shall
think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they’ll all think me
at home! Why, I wouldn’t say anything about it, even if I fell off the
top of the house!” (Which was very likely true.)
Down, down, down. Would the fall never come to an end? “I wonder how
many miles I’ve fallen by this time?” she said aloud. “I must be
getting somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would
be four thousand miles down, I think—” (for, you see, Alice had learnt
several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and
though this was not a very good opportunity for showing off her
knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her, still it was good
practice to say it over) “—yes, that’s about the right distance—but
then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude I’ve got to?” (Alice had no
idea what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but thought they were nice
grand words to say.)
Presently she began again. “I wonder if I shall fall right through
the earth! How funny it’ll seem to come out among the people that walk
with their heads downward! The Antipathies, I think—” (she was rather
glad there was no one listening, this time, as it didn’t sound at all
the right word) “—but I shall have to ask them what the name of the
country is, you know. Please, Ma’am, is this New Zealand or Australia?”
(and she tried to curtsey as she spoke—fancy curtseying as you’re
falling through the air! Do you think you could manage it?) “And what
an ignorant little girl she’ll think me for asking! No, it’ll never do
to ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.”
Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began
talking again. “Dinah’ll miss me very much to-night, I should think!”
(Dinah was the cat.) “I hope they’ll remember her saucer of milk at
tea-time. Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are
no mice in the air, I’m afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that’s
very like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?” And here
Alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a
dreamy sort of way, “Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?” and
sometimes, “Do bats eat cats?” for, you see, as she couldn’t answer
either question, it didn’t much matter which way she put it. She felt
that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was
walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly,
“Now, Dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?” when suddenly,
thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and
the fall was over.
Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment:
she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another
long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down
it. There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind,
and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, “Oh my ears
and whiskers, how late it’s getting!” She was close behind it when she
turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging
from the roof.
There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when
Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every
door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to
get out again.
Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid
glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice’s
first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall;
but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small,
but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second
time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and
behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the
little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!
Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not
much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the
passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get
out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright
flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head
through the doorway; “and even if my head would go through,” thought
poor Alice, “it would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh,
how I wish I could shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only
knew how to begin.” For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had
happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few things
indeed were really impossible.
There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went
back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at
any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this
time she found a little bottle on it, (“which certainly was not here
before,” said Alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper
label, with the words “DRINK ME,” beautifully printed on it in large
letters.
It was all very well to say “Drink me,” but the wise little Alice was
not going to do that in a hurry. “No, I’ll look first,” she said,
“and see whether it’s marked ‘poison’ or not”; for she had read
several nice little histories about children who had got burnt, and
eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they
would not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them:
such as, that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long;
and that if you cut your finger very deeply with a knife, it usually
bleeds; and she had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a
bottle marked “poison,” it is almost certain to disagree with you,
sooner or later.
However, this bottle was not marked “poison,” so Alice ventured to
taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed
flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and
hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.
“What a curious feeling!” said Alice; “I must be shutting up like a
telescope.”
And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face
brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going
through the little door into that lovely garden. First, however, she
waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further:
she felt a little nervous about this; “for it might end, you know,”
said Alice to herself, “in my going out altogether, like a candle. I
wonder what I should be like then?” And she tried to fancy what the
flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could
not remember ever having seen such a thing.
After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going
into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the
door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she
went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach
it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her
best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;
and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing
sat down and cried.
“Come, there’s no use in crying like that!” said Alice to herself,
rather sharply; “I advise you to leave off this minute!” She generally
gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it),
and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into
her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having
cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself,
for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.
“But it’s no use now,” thought poor Alice, “to pretend to be two
people! Why, there’s hardly enough of me left to make one respectable
person!”
Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table:
she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words
“EAT ME” were beautifully marked in currants. “Well, I’ll eat it,” said
Alice, “and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it
makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I’ll
get into the garden, and I don’t care which happens!”
She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, “Which way? Which
way?”, holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was
growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same
size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice
had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way
things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go
on in the common way.
So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.
The Pool of Tears
“Curiouser and curiouser!” cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that
for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English); “now I’m
opening out like the largest telescope that ever was! Good-bye, feet!”
(for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of
sight, they were getting so far off). “Oh, my poor little feet, I
wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? I’m
sure I shan’t be able! I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble
myself about you: you must manage the best way you can;—but I must be
kind to them,” thought Alice, “or perhaps they won’t walk the way I
want to go! Let me see: I’ll give them a new pair of boots every
Christmas.”
And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. “They must
go by the carrier,” she thought; “and how funny it’ll seem, sending
presents to one’s own feet! And how odd the directions will look!
     Alice’s Right Foot, Esq., Hearthrug, near the Fender, (with
     Alice’s love).
Oh dear, what nonsense I’m talking!”
Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was
now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden
key and hurried off to the garden door.
Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to
look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more
hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.
“You ought to be ashamed of yourself,” said Alice, “a great girl like
you,” (she might well say this), “to go on crying in this way! Stop
this moment, I tell you!” But she went on all the same, shedding
gallons of tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about
four inches deep and reaching half down the hall.
After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and
she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the White
Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves
in one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a
great hurry, muttering to himself as he came, “Oh! the Duchess, the
Duchess! Oh! won’t she be savage if I’ve kept her waiting!” Alice felt
so desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the
Rabbit came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, “If you please,
sir—” The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and
the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.
Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she
kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: “Dear, dear! How
queer everything is to-day! And yesterday things went on just as usual.
I wonder if I’ve been changed in the night? Let me think: was I the
same when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remember feeling
a little different. But if I’m not the same, the next question is, Who
in the world am I? Ah, that’s the great puzzle!” And she began
thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age as
herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them.
“I’m sure I’m not Ada,” she said, “for her hair goes in such long
ringlets, and mine doesn’t go in ringlets at all; and I’m sure I can’t
be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a
very little! Besides, she’s she, and I’m I, and—oh dear, how
puzzling it all is! I’ll try if I know all the things I used to know.
Let me see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen,
and four times seven is—oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that
rate! However, the Multiplication Table doesn’t signify: let’s try
Geography. London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of
Rome, and Rome—no, that’s all wrong, I’m certain! I must have been
changed for Mabel! I’ll try and say ‘How doth the little—’” and she
crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began
to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words
did not come the same as they used to do:—
“How doth the little crocodile
    Improve his shining tail,
And pour the waters of the Nile
    On every golden scale!
“How cheerfully he seems to grin,
    How neatly spread his claws,
And welcome little fishes in
    With gently smiling jaws!”
“I’m sure those are not the right words,” said poor Alice, and her eyes
filled with tears again as she went on, “I must be Mabel after all, and
I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to
no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, I’ve
made up my mind about it; if I’m Mabel, I’ll stay down here! It’ll be
no use their putting their heads down and saying ‘Come up again, dear!’
I shall only look up and say ‘Who am I then? Tell me that first, and
then, if I like being that person, I’ll come up: if not, I’ll stay down
here till I’m somebody else’—but, oh dear!” cried Alice, with a sudden
burst of tears, “I do wish they would put their heads down! I am so
very tired of being all alone here!”
As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see
that she had put on one of the Rabbit’s little white kid gloves while
she was talking. “How can I have done that?” she thought. “I must be
growing small again.” She got up and went to the table to measure
herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was
now about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon
found out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she
dropped it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.
“That was a narrow escape!” said Alice, a good deal frightened at the
sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; “and
now for the garden!” and she ran with all speed back to the little
door: but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden
key was lying on the glass table as before, “and things are worse than
ever,” thought the poor child, “for I never was so small as this
before, never! And I declare it’s too bad, that it is!”
As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment,
splash! she was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that
she had somehow fallen into the sea, “and in that case I can go back by
railway,” she said to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once in
her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go
to on the English coast you find a number of bathing machines in the
sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row
of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she
soon made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when
she was nine feet high.
“I wish I hadn’t cried so much!” said Alice, as she swam about, trying
to find her way out. “I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by
being drowned in my own tears! That will be a queer thing, to be
sure! However, everything is queer to-day.”
Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way
off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought
it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small
she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had
slipped in like herself.
“Would it be of any use, now,” thought Alice, “to speak to this mouse?
Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think very
likely it can talk: at any rate, there’s no harm in trying.” So she
began: “O Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired
of swimming about here, O Mouse!” (Alice thought this must be the right
way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but
she remembered having seen in her brother’s Latin Grammar, “A mouse—of
a mouse—to a mouse—a mouse—O mouse!”) The Mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes,
but it said nothing.
“Perhaps it doesn’t understand English,” thought Alice; “I daresay it’s
a French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror.” (For, with all
her knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago
anything had happened.) So she began again: “Où est ma chatte?” which
was the first sentence in her French lesson-book. The Mouse gave a
sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with
fright. “Oh, I beg your pardon!” cried Alice hastily, afraid that she
had hurt the poor animal’s feelings. “I quite forgot you didn’t like
cats.”
“Not like cats!” cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. “Would
you like cats if you were me?”
“Well, perhaps not,” said Alice in a soothing tone: “don’t be angry
about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you’d
take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear
quiet thing,” Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about
in the pool, “and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her
paws and washing her face—and she is such a nice soft thing to
nurse—and she’s such a capital one for catching mice—oh, I beg your
pardon!” cried Alice again, for this time the Mouse was bristling all
over, and she felt certain it must be really offended. “We won’t talk
about her any more if you’d rather not.”
“We indeed!” cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his
tail. “As if I would talk on such a subject! Our family always
hated cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don’t let me hear the name
again!”
“I won’t indeed!” said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of
conversation. “Are you—are you fond—of—of dogs?” The Mouse did not
answer, so Alice went on eagerly: “There is such a nice little dog near
our house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed terrier, you
know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it’ll fetch things when
you throw them, and it’ll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts
of things—I can’t remember half of them—and it belongs to a farmer, you
know, and he says it’s so useful, it’s worth a hundred pounds! He says
it kills all the rats and—oh dear!” cried Alice in a sorrowful tone,
“I’m afraid I’ve offended it again!” For the Mouse was swimming away
from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in the
pool as it went.
So she called softly after it, “Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we
won’t talk about cats or dogs either, if you don’t like them!” When the
Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its face
was quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a low
trembling voice, “Let us get to the shore, and then I’ll tell you my
history, and you’ll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.”
It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the
birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a Duck and a
Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious creatures. Alice
led the way, and the whole party swam to the shore.
A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale
They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank—the
birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close
to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.
The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a
consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite
natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if
she had known them all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long argument
with the Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, “I am
older than you, and must know better;” and this Alice would not allow
without knowing how old it was, and, as the Lory positively refused to
tell its age, there was no more to be said.
At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them,
called out, “Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! I’ll soon make
you dry enough!” They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the
Mouse in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she
felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.
“Ahem!” said the Mouse with an important air, “are you all ready? This
is the driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you please! ‘William
the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted
to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much
accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and Morcar, the earls of
Mercia and Northumbria—’”
“Ugh!” said the Lory, with a shiver.
“I beg your pardon!” said the Mouse, frowning, but very politely: “Did
you speak?”
“Not I!” said the Lory hastily.
“I thought you did,” said the Mouse. “—I proceed. ‘Edwin and Morcar,
the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even
Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found it advisable—’”
“Found what?” said the Duck.
“Found it,” the Mouse replied rather crossly: “of course you know
what ‘it’ means.”
“I know what ‘it’ means well enough, when I find a thing,” said the
Duck: “it’s generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did the
archbishop find?”
The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, “‘—found
it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him
the crown. William’s conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence
of his Normans—’ How are you getting on now, my dear?” it continued,
turning to Alice as it spoke.
“As wet as ever,” said Alice in a melancholy tone: “it doesn’t seem to
dry me at all.”
“In that case,” said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, “I move
that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic
remedies—”
“Speak English!” said the Eaglet. “I don’t know the meaning of half
those long words, and, what’s more, I don’t believe you do either!” And
the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds
tittered audibly.
“What I was going to say,” said the Dodo in an offended tone, “was,
that the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.”
“What is a Caucus-race?” said Alice; not that she wanted much to
know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that somebody ought to
speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.
“Why,” said the Dodo, “the best way to explain it is to do it.” (And,
as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, I will
tell you how the Dodo managed it.)
First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, (“the exact
shape doesn’t matter,” it said,) and then all the party were placed
along the course, here and there. There was no “One, two, three, and
away,” but they began running when they liked, and left off when they
liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. However,
when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry
again, the Dodo suddenly called out “The race is over!” and they all
crowded round it, panting, and asking, “But who has won?”
This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of
thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its
forehead (the position in which you usually see Shakespeare, in the
pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo
said, “Everybody has won, and all must have prizes.”
“But who is to give the prizes?” quite a chorus of voices asked.
“Why, she, of course,” said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with one
finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a
confused way, “Prizes! Prizes!”
Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her
pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had
not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. There was exactly
one a-piece, all round.
“But she must have a prize herself, you know,” said the Mouse.
“Of course,” the Dodo replied very gravely. “What else have you got in
your pocket?” he went on, turning to Alice.
“Only a thimble,” said Alice sadly.
“Hand it over here,” said the Dodo.
Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnly
presented the thimble, saying “We beg your acceptance of this elegant
thimble;” and, when it had finished this short speech, they all
cheered.
Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave
that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything
to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as
she could.
The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and
confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste
theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.
However, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and
begged the Mouse to tell them something more.
“You promised to tell me your history, you know,” said Alice, “and why
it is you hate—C and D,” she added in a whisper, half afraid that it
would be offended again.
“Mine is a long and a sad tale!” said the Mouse, turning to Alice, and
sighing.
“It is a long tail, certainly,” said Alice, looking down with wonder
at the Mouse’s tail; “but why do you call it sad?” And she kept on
puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the
tale was something like this:—
         “Fury said to a mouse, That he met in the house, ‘Let us both
         go to law: I will prosecute you.—Come, I’ll take no
         denial; We must have a trial: For really this morning I’ve
         nothing to do.’ Said the mouse to the cur, ‘Such a trial, dear
         sir, With no jury or judge, would be wasting our breath.’
         ‘I’ll be judge, I’ll be jury,’ Said cunning old Fury: ‘I’ll
         try the whole cause, and condemn you to death.’”
“You are not attending!” said the Mouse to Alice severely. “What are
you thinking of?”
“I beg your pardon,” said Alice very humbly: “you had got to the fifth
bend, I think?”
“I had not!” cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.
“A knot!” said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking
anxiously about her. “Oh, do let me help to undo it!”
“I shall do nothing of the sort,” said the Mouse, getting up and
walking away. “You insult me by talking such nonsense!”
“I didn’t mean it!” pleaded poor Alice. “But you’re so easily offended,
you know!”
The Mouse only growled in reply.
“Please come back and finish your story!” Alice called after it; and
the others all joined in chorus, “Yes, please do!” but the Mouse only
shook its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.
“What a pity it wouldn’t stay!” sighed the Lory, as soon as it was
quite out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to
her daughter “Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose
your temper!” “Hold your tongue, Ma!” said the young Crab, a little
snappishly. “You’re enough to try the patience of an oyster!”
“I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!” said Alice aloud,
addressing nobody in particular. “She’d soon fetch it back!”
“And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?” said the
Lory.
Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet:
“Dinah’s our cat. And she’s such a capital one for catching mice you
can’t think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why,
she’ll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!”
This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. Some of the
birds hurried off at once: one old Magpie began wrapping itself up very
carefully, remarking, “I really must be getting home; the night-air
doesn’t suit my throat!” and a Canary called out in a trembling voice
to its children, “Come away, my dears! It’s high time you were all in
bed!” On various pretexts they all moved off, and Alice was soon left
alone.
“I wish I hadn’t mentioned Dinah!” she said to herself in a melancholy
tone. “Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I’m sure she’s the best
cat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you
any more!” And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very
lonely and low-spirited. In a little while, however, she again heard a
little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up
eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was
coming back to finish his story.
The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill
It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking
anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard
it muttering to itself “The Duchess! The Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh
my fur and whiskers! She’ll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are
ferrets! Where can I have dropped them, I wonder?” Alice guessed in a
moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid
gloves, and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but
they were nowhere to be seen—everything seemed to have changed since
her swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the
little door, had vanished completely.
Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and
called out to her in an angry tone, “Why, Mary Ann, what are you
doing out here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and
a fan! Quick, now!” And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off
at once in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the
mistake it had made.
“He took me for his housemaid,” she said to herself as she ran. “How
surprised he’ll be when he finds out who I am! But I’d better take him
his fan and gloves—that is, if I can find them.” As she said this, she
came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass
plate with the name “W. RABBIT,” engraved upon it. She went in without
knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the
real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the
fan and gloves.
“How queer it seems,” Alice said to herself, “to be going messages for
a rabbit! I suppose Dinah’ll be sending me on messages next!” And she
began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: “‘Miss Alice! Come
here directly, and get ready for your walk!’ ‘Coming in a minute,
nurse! But I’ve got to see that the mouse doesn’t get out.’ Only I
don’t think,” Alice went on, “that they’d let Dinah stop in the house
if it began ordering people about like that!”
By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table
in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three
pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the
gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a
little bottle that stood near the looking-glass. There was no label
this time with the words “DRINK ME,” but nevertheless she uncorked it
and put it to her lips. “I know something interesting is sure to
happen,” she said to herself, “whenever I eat or drink anything; so
I’ll just see what this bottle does. I do hope it’ll make me grow large
again, for really I’m quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!”
It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had
drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling,
and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken. She hastily put
down the bottle, saying to herself “That’s quite enough—I hope I shan’t
grow any more—As it is, I can’t get out at the door—I do wish I hadn’t
drunk quite so much!”
Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on growing, and growing,
and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there
was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with
one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out
of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself “Now I
can do no more, whatever happens. What will become of me?”
Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect,
and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room
again, no wonder she felt unhappy.
“It was much pleasanter at home,” thought poor Alice, “when one wasn’t
always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and
rabbits. I almost wish I hadn’t gone down that rabbit-hole—and yet—and
yet—it’s rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I do wonder what
can have happened to me! When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied
that kind of thing never happened, and now here I am in the middle of
one! There ought to be a book written about me, that there ought! And
when I grow up, I’ll write one—but I’m grown up now,” she added in a
sorrowful tone; “at least there’s no room to grow up any more here.”
“But then,” thought Alice, “shall I never get any older than I am
now? That’ll be a comfort, one way—never to be an old woman—but
then—always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldn’t like that!”
“Oh, you foolish Alice!” she answered herself. “How can you learn
lessons in here? Why, there’s hardly room for you, and no room at all
for any lesson-books!”
And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and
making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes
she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.
“Mary Ann! Mary Ann!” said the voice. “Fetch me my gloves this moment!”
Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice knew it was
the Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the
house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as
large as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.
Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as
the door opened inwards, and Alice’s elbow was pressed hard against it,
that attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say to itself “Then I’ll
go round and get in at the window.”
“That you won’t!” thought Alice, and, after waiting till she fancied
she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her
hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of anything,
but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass,
from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a
cucumber-frame, or something of the sort.
Next came an angry voice—the Rabbit’s—“Pat! Pat! Where are you?” And
then a voice she had never heard before, “Sure then I’m here! Digging
for apples, yer honour!”
“Digging for apples, indeed!” said the Rabbit angrily. “Here! Come and
help me out of this!” (Sounds of more broken glass.)
“Now tell me, Pat, what’s that in the window?”
“Sure, it’s an arm, yer honour!” (He pronounced it “arrum.”)
“An arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it fills the whole
window!”
“Sure, it does, yer honour: but it’s an arm for all that.”
“Well, it’s got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!”
There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear whispers
now and then; such as, “Sure, I don’t like it, yer honour, at all, at
all!” “Do as I tell you, you coward!” and at last she spread out her
hand again, and made another snatch in the air. This time there were
two little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. “What a number
of cucumber-frames there must be!” thought Alice. “I wonder what
they’ll do next! As for pulling me out of the window, I only wish they
could! I’m sure I don’t want to stay in here any longer!”
She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a
rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices all
talking together: she made out the words: “Where’s the other
ladder?—Why, I hadn’t to bring but one; Bill’s got the other—Bill!
fetch it here, lad!—Here, put ’em up at this corner—No, tie ’em
together first—they don’t reach half high enough yet—Oh! they’ll do
well enough; don’t be particular—Here, Bill! catch hold of this
rope—Will the roof bear?—Mind that loose slate—Oh, it’s coming down!
Heads below!” (a loud crash)—“Now, who did that?—It was Bill, I
fancy—Who’s to go down the chimney?—Nay, I shan’t! You do
it!—That I won’t, then!—Bill’s to go down—Here, Bill! the master says
you’re to go down the chimney!”
“Oh! So Bill’s got to come down the chimney, has he?” said Alice to
herself. “Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldn’t be in
Bill’s place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but
I think I can kick a little!”
She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited till
she heard a little animal (she couldn’t guess of what sort it was)
scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then,
saying to herself “This is Bill,” she gave one sharp kick, and waited
to see what would happen next.
The first thing she heard was a general chorus of “There goes Bill!”
then the Rabbit’s voice along—“Catch him, you by the hedge!” then
silence, and then another confusion of voices—“Hold up his head—Brandy
now—Don’t choke him—How was it, old fellow? What happened to you? Tell
us all about it!”
Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, (“That’s Bill,” thought
Alice,) “Well, I hardly know—No more, thank ye; I’m better now—but I’m
a deal too flustered to tell you—all I know is, something comes at me
like a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket!”
“So you did, old fellow!” said the others.
“We must burn the house down!” said the Rabbit’s voice; and Alice
called out as loud as she could, “If you do, I’ll set Dinah at you!”
There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to herself, “I
wonder what they will do next! If they had any sense, they’d take the
roof off.” After a minute or two, they began moving about again, and
Alice heard the Rabbit say, “A barrowful will do, to begin with.”
“A barrowful of what?” thought Alice; but she had not long to doubt,
for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the
window, and some of them hit her in the face. “I’ll put a stop to
this,” she said to herself, and shouted out, “You’d better not do that
again!” which produced another dead silence.
Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into
little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her
head. “If I eat one of these cakes,” she thought, “it’s sure to make
some change in my size; and as it can’t possibly make me larger, it
must make me smaller, I suppose.”
So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she
began shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get
through the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of
little animals and birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill,
was in the middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it
something out of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the moment she
appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself
safe in a thick wood.
“The first thing I’ve got to do,” said Alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wood, “is to grow to my right size again; and the
second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that
will be the best plan.”
It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply
arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea
how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among
the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a
great hurry.
An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and
feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. “Poor little
thing!” said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to
it; but she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it
might be hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in
spite of all her coaxing.
Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and
held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off
all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick,
and made believe to worry it; then Alice dodged behind a great thistle,
to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on the
other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head
over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was
very like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then
the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very
little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely
all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with
its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.
This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she
set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath,
and till the puppy’s bark sounded quite faint in the distance.
“And yet what a dear little puppy it was!” said Alice, as she leant
against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the
leaves: “I should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if—if I’d
only been the right size to do it! Oh dear! I’d nearly forgotten that
I’ve got to grow up again! Let me see—how is it to be managed? I
suppose I ought to eat or drink something or other; but the great
question is, what?”
The great question certainly was, what? Alice looked all round her at
the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that
looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances.
There was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as
herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and
behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what
was on the top of it.
She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the
mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large blue
caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly
smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of
anything else.
Advice from a Caterpillar
The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in
silence: at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and
addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.
“Who are you?” said the Caterpillar.
This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. Alice replied,
rather shyly, “I—I hardly know, sir, just at present—at least I know
who I was when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been
changed several times since then.”
“What do you mean by that?” said the Caterpillar sternly. “Explain
yourself!”
“I can’t explain myself, I’m afraid, sir,” said Alice, “because I’m
not myself, you see.”
“I don’t see,” said the Caterpillar.
“I’m afraid I can’t put it more clearly,” Alice replied very politely,
“for I can’t understand it myself to begin with; and being so many
different sizes in a day is very confusing.”
“It isn’t,” said the Caterpillar.
“Well, perhaps you haven’t found it so yet,” said Alice; “but when you
have to turn into a chrysalis—you will some day, you know—and then
after that into a butterfly, I should think you’ll feel it a little
queer, won’t you?”
“Not a bit,” said the Caterpillar.
“Well, perhaps your feelings may be different,” said Alice; “all I know
is, it would feel very queer to me.”
“You!” said the Caterpillar contemptuously. “Who are you?”
Which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation.
Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar’s making such very
short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, “I
think, you ought to tell me who you are, first.”
“Why?” said the Caterpillar.
Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not think of any
good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a very unpleasant
state of mind, she turned away.
“Come back!” the Caterpillar called after her. “I’ve something
important to say!”
This sounded promising, certainly: Alice turned and came back again.
“Keep your temper,” said the Caterpillar.
“Is that all?” said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she
could.
“No,” said the Caterpillar.
Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do,
and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. For
some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded
its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, “So you
think you’re changed, do you?”
“I’m afraid I am, sir,” said Alice; “I can’t remember things as I
used—and I don’t keep the same size for ten minutes together!”
“Can’t remember what things?” said the Caterpillar.
“Well, I’ve tried to say “How doth the little busy bee,” but it all
came different!” Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.
“Repeat, “You are old, Father William,’” said the Caterpillar.
Alice folded her hands, and began:—
“You are old, Father William,” the young man said,
    “And your hair has become very white;
And yet you incessantly stand on your head—
    Do you think, at your age, it is right?”
“In my youth,” Father William replied to his son,
    “I feared it might injure the brain;
But, now that I’m perfectly sure I have none,
    Why, I do it again and again.”
“You are old,” said the youth, “as I mentioned before,
    And have grown most uncommonly fat;
Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door—
    Pray, what is the reason of that?”
“In my youth,” said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
    “I kept all my limbs very supple
By the use of this ointment—one shilling the box—
    Allow me to sell you a couple?”
“You are old,” said the youth, “and your jaws are too weak
    For anything tougher than suet;
Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak—
    Pray, how did you manage to do it?”
“In my youth,” said his father, “I took to the law,
    And argued each case with my wife;
And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
    Has lasted the rest of my life.”
“You are old,” said the youth, “one would hardly suppose
    That your eye was as steady as ever;
Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose—
    What made you so awfully clever?”
“I have answered three questions, and that is enough,”
    Said his father; “don’t give yourself airs!
Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
    Be off, or I’ll kick you down stairs!”
“That is not said right,” said the Caterpillar.
“Not quite right, I’m afraid,” said Alice, timidly; “some of the
words have got altered.”
“It is wrong from beginning to end,” said the Caterpillar decidedly,
and there was silence for some minutes.
The Caterpillar was the first to speak.
“What size do you want to be?” it asked.
“Oh, I’m not particular as to size,” Alice hastily replied; “only one
doesn’t like changing so often, you know.”
“I don’t know,” said the Caterpillar.
Alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life
before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.
“Are you content now?” said the Caterpillar.
“Well, I should like to be a little larger, sir, if you wouldn’t
mind,” said Alice: “three inches is such a wretched height to be.”
“It is a very good height indeed!” said the Caterpillar angrily,
rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).
“But I’m not used to it!” pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone. And she
thought of herself, “I wish the creatures wouldn’t be so easily
offended!”
“You’ll get used to it in time,” said the Caterpillar; and it put the
hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.
This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. In a
minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth and
yawned once or twice, and shook itself. Then it got down off the
mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went,
“One side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you
grow shorter.”
“One side of what? The other side of what?” thought Alice to
herself.
“Of the mushroom,” said the Caterpillar, just as if she had asked it
aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.
Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute,
trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was
perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question. However, at
last she stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke
off a bit of the edge with each hand.
“And now which is which?” she said to herself, and nibbled a little of
the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a
violent blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!
She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt
that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she
set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. Her chin was pressed
so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her
mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the
lefthand bit.
“Come, my head’s free at last!” said Alice in a tone of delight, which
changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders
were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was
an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a
sea of green leaves that lay far below her.
“What can all that green stuff be?” said Alice. “And where have my
shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can’t see you?”
She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow,
except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.
As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head,
she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that
her neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. She
had just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was
going to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but
the tops of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp
hiss made her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her
face, and was beating her violently with its wings.
“Serpent!” screamed the Pigeon.
“I’m not a serpent!” said Alice indignantly. “Let me alone!”
“Serpent, I say again!” repeated the Pigeon, but in a more subdued
tone, and added with a kind of sob, “I’ve tried every way, and nothing
seems to suit them!”
“I haven’t the least idea what you’re talking about,” said Alice.
“I’ve tried the roots of trees, and I’ve tried banks, and I’ve tried
hedges,” the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; “but those
serpents! There’s no pleasing them!”
Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in
saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.
“As if it wasn’t trouble enough hatching the eggs,” said the Pigeon;
“but I must be on the look-out for serpents night and day! Why, I
haven’t had a wink of sleep these three weeks!”
“I’m very sorry you’ve been annoyed,” said Alice, who was beginning to
see its meaning.
“And just as I’d taken the highest tree in the wood,” continued the
Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, “and just as I was thinking I
should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down
from the sky! Ugh, Serpent!”
“But I’m not a serpent, I tell you!” said Alice. “I’m a—I’m a—”
“Well! What are you?” said the Pigeon. “I can see you’re trying to
invent something!”
“I—I’m a little girl,” said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered
the number of changes she had gone through that day.
“A likely story indeed!” said the Pigeon in a tone of the deepest
contempt. “I’ve seen a good many little girls in my time, but never
one with such a neck as that! No, no! You’re a serpent; and there’s
no use denying it. I suppose you’ll be telling me next that you never
tasted an egg!”
“I have tasted eggs, certainly,” said Alice, who was a very truthful
child; “but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you
know.”
“I don’t believe it,” said the Pigeon; “but if they do, why then
they’re a kind of serpent, that’s all I can say.”
This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent for a
minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, “You’re
looking for eggs, I know that well enough; and what does it matter to
me whether you’re a little girl or a serpent?”
“It matters a good deal to me,” said Alice hastily; “but I’m not
looking for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn’t want
yours: I don’t like them raw.”
“Well, be off, then!” said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled
down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as well
as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches,
and every now and then she had to stop and untwist it. After a while
she remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands,
and she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at
the other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until
she had succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.
It was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it
felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes,
and began talking to herself, as usual. “Come, there’s half my plan
done now! How puzzling all these changes are! I’m never sure what I’m
going to be, from one minute to another! However, I’ve got back to my
right size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden—how
is that to be done, I wonder?” As she said this, she came suddenly
upon an open place, with a little house in it about four feet high.
“Whoever lives there,” thought Alice, “it’ll never do to come upon them
this size: why, I should frighten them out of their wits!” So she
began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did not venture to go
near the house till she had brought herself down to nine inches high.
Pig and Pepper
For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what
to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of the
wood—(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery:
otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a
fish)—and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. It was opened by
another footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like a
frog; and both footmen, Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled
all over their heads. She felt very curious to know what it was all
about, and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.
The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter,
nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other,
saying, in a solemn tone, “For the Duchess. An invitation from the
Queen to play croquet.” The Frog-Footman repeated, in the same solemn
tone, only changing the order of the words a little, “From the Queen.
An invitation for the Duchess to play croquet.”
Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.
Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the wood
for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the
Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the
door, staring stupidly up into the sky.
Alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.
“There’s no sort of use in knocking,” said the Footman, “and that for
two reasons. First, because I’m on the same side of the door as you
are; secondly, because they’re making such a noise inside, no one could
possibly hear you.” And certainly there was a most extraordinary
noise going on within—a constant howling and sneezing, and every now
and then a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to
pieces.
“Please, then,” said Alice, “how am I to get in?”
“There might be some sense in your knocking,” the Footman went on
without attending to her, “if we had the door between us. For instance,
if you were inside, you might knock, and I could let you out, you
know.” He was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and
this Alice thought decidedly uncivil. “But perhaps he can’t help it,”
she said to herself; “his eyes are so very nearly at the top of his
head. But at any rate he might answer questions.—How am I to get in?”
she repeated, aloud.
“I shall sit here,” the Footman remarked, “till tomorrow—”
At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came
skimming out, straight at the Footman’s head: it just grazed his nose,
and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.
“—or next day, maybe,” the Footman continued in the same tone, exactly
as if nothing had happened.
“How am I to get in?” asked Alice again, in a louder tone.
“Are you to get in at all?” said the Footman. “That’s the first
question, you know.”
It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. “It’s really
dreadful,” she muttered to herself, “the way all the creatures argue.
It’s enough to drive one crazy!”
The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his
remark, with variations. “I shall sit here,” he said, “on and off, for
days and days.”
“But what am I to do?” said Alice.
“Anything you like,” said the Footman, and began whistling.
“Oh, there’s no use in talking to him,” said Alice desperately: “he’s
perfectly idiotic!” And she opened the door and went in.
The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from
one end to the other: the Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool
in the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire,
stirring a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.
“There’s certainly too much pepper in that soup!” Alice said to
herself, as well as she could for sneezing.
There was certainly too much of it in the air. Even the Duchess sneezed
occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling
alternately without a moment’s pause. The only things in the kitchen
that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting
on the hearth and grinning from ear to ear.
“Please would you tell me,” said Alice, a little timidly, for she was
not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, “why
your cat grins like that?”
“It’s a Cheshire cat,” said the Duchess, “and that’s why. Pig!”
She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite
jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the
baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:—
“I didn’t know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didn’t
know that cats could grin.”
“They all can,” said the Duchess; “and most of ’em do.”
“I don’t know of any that do,” Alice said very politely, feeling quite
pleased to have got into a conversation.
“You don’t know much,” said the Duchess; “and that’s a fact.”
Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would
be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. While she
was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the
fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at
the Duchess and the baby—the fire-irons came first; then followed a
shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of
them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already,
that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.
“Oh, please mind what you’re doing!” cried Alice, jumping up and down
in an agony of terror. “Oh, there goes his precious nose!” as an
unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it
off.
“If everybody minded their own business,” the Duchess said in a hoarse
growl, “the world would go round a deal faster than it does.”
“Which would not be an advantage,” said Alice, who felt very glad to
get an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. “Just
think of what work it would make with the day and night! You see the
earth takes twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis—”
“Talking of axes,” said the Duchess, “chop off her head!”
Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take
the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to
be listening, so she went on again: “Twenty-four hours, I think; or
is it twelve? I—”
“Oh, don’t bother me,” said the Duchess; “I never could abide
figures!” And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a
sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at
the end of every line:
“Speak roughly to your little boy,
    And beat him when he sneezes:
He only does it to annoy,
    Because he knows it teases.”
(In which the cook and the baby joined):
“Wow! wow! wow!”
While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing
the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so,
that Alice could hardly hear the words:—
“I speak severely to my boy,
    I beat him when he sneezes;
For he can thoroughly enjoy
    The pepper when he pleases!”
“Wow! wow! wow!”
“Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!” the Duchess said to Alice,
flinging the baby at her as she spoke. “I must go and get ready to play
croquet with the Queen,” and she hurried out of the room. The cook
threw a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.
Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped
little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions,
“just like a star-fish,” thought Alice. The poor little thing was
snorting like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling
itself up and straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for
the first minute or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.
As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to
twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right
ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried it
out into the open air. “If I don’t take this child away with me,”
thought Alice, “they’re sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn’t it be
murder to leave it behind?” She said the last words out loud, and the
little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).
“Don’t grunt,” said Alice; “that’s not at all a proper way of
expressing yourself.”
The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into its face
to see what was the matter with it. There could be no doubt that it had
a very turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also
its eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether Alice did
not like the look of the thing at all. “But perhaps it was only
sobbing,” she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there
were any tears.
No, there were no tears. “If you’re going to turn into a pig, my dear,”
said Alice, seriously, “I’ll have nothing more to do with you. Mind
now!” The poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible
to say which), and they went on for some while in silence.
Alice was just beginning to think to herself, “Now, what am I to do
with this creature when I get it home?” when it grunted again, so
violently, that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This time
there could be no mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than
a pig, and she felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it
further.
So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see it
trot away quietly into the wood. “If it had grown up,” she said to
herself, “it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes
rather a handsome pig, I think.” And she began thinking over other
children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying
to herself, “if one only knew the right way to change them—” when she
was a little startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of
a tree a few yards off.
The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good-natured, she
thought: still it had very long claws and a great many teeth, so she
felt that it ought to be treated with respect.
“Cheshire Puss,” she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know
whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little
wider. “Come, it’s pleased so far,” thought Alice, and she went on.
“Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?”
“That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,” said the Cat.
“I don’t much care where—” said Alice.
“Then it doesn’t matter which way you go,” said the Cat.
“—so long as I get somewhere,” Alice added as an explanation.
“Oh, you’re sure to do that,” said the Cat, “if you only walk long
enough.”
Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another
question. “What sort of people live about here?”
“In that direction,” the Cat said, waving its right paw round, “lives
a Hatter: and in that direction,” waving the other paw, “lives a
March Hare. Visit either you like: they’re both mad.”
“But I don’t want to go among mad people,” Alice remarked.
“Oh, you can’t help that,” said the Cat: “we’re all mad here. I’m mad.
You’re mad.”
“How do you know I’m mad?” said Alice.
“You must be,” said the Cat, “or you wouldn’t have come here.”
Alice didn’t think that proved it at all; however, she went on “And how
do you know that you’re mad?”
“To begin with,” said the Cat, “a dog’s not mad. You grant that?”
“I suppose so,” said Alice.
“Well, then,” the Cat went on, “you see, a dog growls when it’s angry,
and wags its tail when it’s pleased. Now I growl when I’m pleased,
and wag my tail when I’m angry. Therefore I’m mad.”
“I call it purring, not growling,” said Alice.
“Call it what you like,” said the Cat. “Do you play croquet with the
Queen to-day?”
“I should like it very much,” said Alice, “but I haven’t been invited
yet.”
“You’ll see me there,” said the Cat, and vanished.
Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer
things happening. While she was looking at the place where it had been,
it suddenly appeared again.
“By-the-bye, what became of the baby?” said the Cat. “I’d nearly
forgotten to ask.”
“It turned into a pig,” Alice quietly said, just as if it had come back
in a natural way.
“I thought it would,” said the Cat, and vanished again.
Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not
appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in
which the March Hare was said to live. “I’ve seen hatters before,” she
said to herself; “the March Hare will be much the most interesting, and
perhaps as this is May it won’t be raving mad—at least not so mad as it
was in March.” As she said this, she looked up, and there was the Cat
again, sitting on a branch of a tree.
“Did you say pig, or fig?” said the Cat.
“I said pig,” replied Alice; “and I wish you wouldn’t keep appearing
and vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.”
“All right,” said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly,
beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which
remained some time after the rest of it had gone.
“Well! I’ve often seen a cat without a grin,” thought Alice; “but a
grin without a cat! It’s the most curious thing I ever saw in my life!”
She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house of
the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the
chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur. It
was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had
nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself
to about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather
timidly, saying to herself “Suppose it should be raving mad after all!
I almost wish I’d gone to see the Hatter instead!”
A Mad Tea-Party
There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the
March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting
between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a
cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head. “Very
uncomfortable for the Dormouse,” thought Alice; “only, as it’s asleep,
I suppose it doesn’t mind.”
The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at
one corner of it: “No room! No room!” they cried out when they saw
Alice coming. “There’s plenty of room!” said Alice indignantly, and
she sat down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.
“Have some wine,” the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.
Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea.
“I don’t see any wine,” she remarked.
“There isn’t any,” said the March Hare.
“Then it wasn’t very civil of you to offer it,” said Alice angrily.
“It wasn’t very civil of you to sit down without being invited,” said
the March Hare.
“I didn’t know it was your table,” said Alice; “it’s laid for a great
many more than three.”
“Your hair wants cutting,” said the Hatter. He had been looking at
Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first
speech.
“You should learn not to make personal remarks,” Alice said with some
severity; “it’s very rude.”
The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he said
was, “Why is a raven like a writing-desk?”
“Come, we shall have some fun now!” thought Alice. “I’m glad they’ve
begun asking riddles.—I believe I can guess that,” she added aloud.
“Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?” said
the March Hare.
“Exactly so,” said Alice.
“Then you should say what you mean,” the March Hare went on.
“I do,” Alice hastily replied; “at least—at least I mean what I
say—that’s the same thing, you know.”
“Not the same thing a bit!” said the Hatter. “You might just as well
say that ‘I see what I eat’ is the same thing as ‘I eat what I see’!”
“You might just as well say,” added the March Hare, “that ‘I like what
I get’ is the same thing as ‘I get what I like’!”
“You might just as well say,” added the Dormouse, who seemed to be
talking in his sleep, “that ‘I breathe when I sleep’ is the same thing
as ‘I sleep when I breathe’!”
“It is the same thing with you,” said the Hatter, and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while
Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and
writing-desks, which wasn’t much.
The Hatter was the first to break the silence. “What day of the month
is it?” he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his
pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then,
and holding it to his ear.
Alice considered a little, and then said “The fourth.”
“Two days wrong!” sighed the Hatter. “I told you butter wouldn’t suit
the works!” he added looking angrily at the March Hare.
“It was the best butter,” the March Hare meekly replied.
“Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,” the Hatter grumbled:
“you shouldn’t have put it in with the bread-knife.”
The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped
it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of
nothing better to say than his first remark, “It was the best butter,
you know.”
Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. “What a
funny watch!” she remarked. “It tells the day of the month, and doesn’t
tell what o’clock it is!”
“Why should it?” muttered the Hatter. “Does your watch tell you what
year it is?”
“Of course not,” Alice replied very readily: “but that’s because it
stays the same year for such a long time together.”
“Which is just the case with mine,” said the Hatter.
Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter’s remark seemed to have no
sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. “I don’t quite
understand you,” she said, as politely as she could.
“The Dormouse is asleep again,” said the Hatter, and he poured a little
hot tea upon its nose.
The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its
eyes, “Of course, of course; just what I was going to remark myself.”
“Have you guessed the riddle yet?” the Hatter said, turning to Alice
again.
“No, I give it up,” Alice replied: “what’s the answer?”
“I haven’t the slightest idea,” said the Hatter.
“Nor I,” said the March Hare.
Alice sighed wearily. “I think you might do something better with the
time,” she said, “than waste it in asking riddles that have no
answers.”
“If you knew Time as well as I do,” said the Hatter, “you wouldn’t talk
about wasting it. It’s him.”
“I don’t know what you mean,” said Alice.
“Of course you don’t!” the Hatter said, tossing his head
contemptuously. “I dare say you never even spoke to Time!”
“Perhaps not,” Alice cautiously replied: “but I know I have to beat
time when I learn music.”
“Ah! that accounts for it,” said the Hatter. “He won’t stand beating.
Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he’d do almost anything
you liked with the clock. For instance, suppose it were nine o’clock in
the morning, just time to begin lessons: you’d only have to whisper a
hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! Half-past one,
time for dinner!”
(“I only wish it was,” the March Hare said to itself in a whisper.)
“That would be grand, certainly,” said Alice thoughtfully: “but then—I
shouldn’t be hungry for it, you know.”
“Not at first, perhaps,” said the Hatter: “but you could keep it to
half-past one as long as you liked.”
“Is that the way you manage?” Alice asked.
The Hatter shook his head mournfully. “Not I!” he replied. “We
quarrelled last March—just before he went mad, you know—” (pointing
with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) “—it was at the great concert
given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing
‘Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
How I wonder what you’re at!’
You know the song, perhaps?”
“I’ve heard something like it,” said Alice.
“It goes on, you know,” the Hatter continued, “in this way:—
‘Up above the world you fly,
Like a tea-tray in the sky.
                    Twinkle, twinkle—’”
Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep
“Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle—” and went on so long that they
had to pinch it to make it stop.
“Well, I’d hardly finished the first verse,” said the Hatter, “when the
Queen jumped up and bawled out, ‘He’s murdering the time! Off with his
head!’”
“How dreadfully savage!” exclaimed Alice.
“And ever since that,” the Hatter went on in a mournful tone, “he won’t
do a thing I ask! It’s always six o’clock now.”
A bright idea came into Alice’s head. “Is that the reason so many
tea-things are put out here?” she asked.
“Yes, that’s it,” said the Hatter with a sigh: “it’s always tea-time,
and we’ve no time to wash the things between whiles.”
“Then you keep moving round, I suppose?” said Alice.
“Exactly so,” said the Hatter: “as the things get used up.”
“But what happens when you come to the beginning again?” Alice ventured
to ask.
“Suppose we change the subject,” the March Hare interrupted, yawning.
“I’m getting tired of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story.”
“I’m afraid I don’t know one,” said Alice, rather alarmed at the
proposal.
“Then the Dormouse shall!” they both cried. “Wake up, Dormouse!” And
they pinched it on both sides at once.
The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. “I wasn’t asleep,” he said in a
hoarse, feeble voice: “I heard every word you fellows were saying.”
“Tell us a story!” said the March Hare.
“Yes, please do!” pleaded Alice.
“And be quick about it,” added the Hatter, “or you’ll be asleep again
before it’s done.”
“Once upon a time there were three little sisters,” the Dormouse began
in a great hurry; “and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and
they lived at the bottom of a well—”
“What did they live on?” said Alice, who always took a great interest
in questions of eating and drinking.
“They lived on treacle,” said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute or
two.
“They couldn’t have done that, you know,” Alice gently remarked;
“they’d have been ill.”
“So they were,” said the Dormouse; “very ill.”
Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways of
living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: “But
why did they live at the bottom of a well?”
“Take some more tea,” the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.
“I’ve had nothing yet,” Alice replied in an offended tone, “so I can’t
take more.”
“You mean you can’t take less,” said the Hatter: “it’s very easy to
take more than nothing.”
“Nobody asked your opinion,” said Alice.
“Who’s making personal remarks now?” the Hatter asked triumphantly.
Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to
some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and
repeated her question. “Why did they live at the bottom of a well?”
The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then
said, “It was a treacle-well.”
“There’s no such thing!” Alice was beginning very angrily, but the
Hatter and the March Hare went “Sh! sh!” and the Dormouse sulkily
remarked, “If you can’t be civil, you’d better finish the story for
yourself.”
“No, please go on!” Alice said very humbly; “I won’t interrupt again. I
dare say there may be one.”
“One, indeed!” said the Dormouse indignantly. However, he consented to
go on. “And so these three little sisters—they were learning to draw,
you know—”
“What did they draw?” said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.
“Treacle,” said the Dormouse, without considering at all this time.
“I want a clean cup,” interrupted the Hatter: “let’s all move one place
on.”
He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare
moved into the Dormouse’s place, and Alice rather unwillingly took the
place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any
advantage from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than
before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.
Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began very
cautiously: “But I don’t understand. Where did they draw the treacle
from?”
“You can draw water out of a water-well,” said the Hatter; “so I should
think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well—eh, stupid?”
“But they were in the well,” Alice said to the Dormouse, not choosing
to notice this last remark.
“Of course they were,” said the Dormouse; “—well in.”
This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse go on for
some time without interrupting it.
“They were learning to draw,” the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing
its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; “and they drew all manner of
things—everything that begins with an M—”
“Why with an M?” said Alice.
“Why not?” said the March Hare.
Alice was silent.
The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into a
doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again with a
little shriek, and went on: “—that begins with an M, such as
mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness—you know you say
things are “much of a muchness”—did you ever see such a thing as a
drawing of a muchness?”
“Really, now you ask me,” said Alice, very much confused, “I don’t
think—”
“Then you shouldn’t talk,” said the Hatter.
This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in
great disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and
neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she
looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her:
the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into
the teapot.
“At any rate I’ll never go there again!” said Alice as she picked her
way through the wood. “It’s the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in
all my life!”
Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door
leading right into it. “That’s very curious!” she thought. “But
everything’s curious today. I think I may as well go in at once.” And
in she went.
Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little
glass table. “Now, I’ll manage better this time,” she said to herself,
and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that
led into the garden. Then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom
(she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot
high: then she walked down the little passage: and then—she found
herself at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds
and the cool fountains.
The Queen’s Croquet-Ground
A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses
growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily
painting them red. Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she
went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard
one of them say, “Look out now, Five! Don’t go splashing paint over me
like that!”
“I couldn’t help it,” said Five, in a sulky tone; “Seven jogged my
elbow.”
On which Seven looked up and said, “That’s right, Five! Always lay the
blame on others!”
“You’d better not talk!” said Five. “I heard the Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!”
“What for?” said the one who had spoken first.
“That’s none of your business, Two!” said Seven.
“Yes, it is his business!” said Five, “and I’ll tell him—it was for
bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.”
Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun “Well, of all the unjust
things—” when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching
them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also,
and all of them bowed low.
“Would you tell me,” said Alice, a little timidly, “why you are
painting those roses?”
Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low
voice, “Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a
red rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the Queen
was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know. So
you see, Miss, we’re doing our best, afore she comes, to—” At this
moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called
out “The Queen! The Queen!” and the three gardeners instantly threw
themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps,
and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.
First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like the
three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the
corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with
diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. After these came
the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came
jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all
ornamented with hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens,
and among them Alice recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a
hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went
by without noticing her. Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying
the King’s crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this
grand procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.
Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face
like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard
of such a rule at processions; “and besides, what would be the use of a
procession,” thought she, “if people had all to lie down upon their
faces, so that they couldn’t see it?” So she stood still where she was,
and waited.
When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked
at her, and the Queen said severely “Who is this?” She said it to the
Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.
“Idiot!” said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to
Alice, she went on, “What’s your name, child?”
“My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,” said Alice very politely;
but she added, to herself, “Why, they’re only a pack of cards, after
all. I needn’t be afraid of them!”
“And who are these?” said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners
who were lying round the rose-tree; for, you see, as they were lying on
their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of
the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers,
or courtiers, or three of her own children.
“How should I know?” said Alice, surprised at her own courage. “It’s
no business of mine.”
The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a
moment like a wild beast, screamed “Off with her head! Off—”
“Nonsense!” said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen was
silent.
The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said “Consider, my
dear: she is only a child!”
The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave “Turn
them over!”
The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.
“Get up!” said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three
gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen,
the royal children, and everybody else.
“Leave off that!” screamed the Queen. “You make me giddy.” And then,
turning to the rose-tree, she went on, “What have you been doing
here?”
“May it please your Majesty,” said Two, in a very humble tone, going
down on one knee as he spoke, “we were trying—”
“I see!” said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses.
“Off with their heads!” and the procession moved on, three of the
soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran
to Alice for protection.
“You shan’t be beheaded!” said Alice, and she put them into a large
flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a
minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the
others.
“Are their heads off?” shouted the Queen.
“Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!” the soldiers shouted
in reply.
“That’s right!” shouted the Queen. “Can you play croquet?”
The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was
evidently meant for her.
“Yes!” shouted Alice.
“Come on, then!” roared the Queen, and Alice joined the procession,
wondering very much what would happen next.
“It’s—it’s a very fine day!” said a timid voice at her side. She was
walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.
“Very,” said Alice: “—where’s the Duchess?”
“Hush! Hush!” said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He looked
anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon
tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered “She’s under
sentence of execution.”
“What for?” said Alice.
“Did you say ‘What a pity!’?” the Rabbit asked.
“No, I didn’t,” said Alice: “I don’t think it’s at all a pity. I said
‘What for?’”
“She boxed the Queen’s ears—” the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little
scream of laughter. “Oh, hush!” the Rabbit whispered in a frightened
tone. “The Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and the
Queen said—”
“Get to your places!” shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and
people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each
other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game
began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground
in her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live
hedgehogs, the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double
themselves up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.
The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo:
she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough,
under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she
had got its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the
hedgehog a blow with its head, it would twist itself round and look
up in her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help
bursting out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was
going to begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog
had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all
this, there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she
wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were
always getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice
soon came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.
The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling
all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time
the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and
shouting “Off with his head!” or “Off with her head!” about once in a
minute.
Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any
dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute,
“and then,” thought she, “what would become of me? They’re dreadfully
fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there’s any
one left alive!”
She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she
could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious
appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after
watching it a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said
to herself “It’s the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk
to.”
“How are you getting on?” said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth
enough for it to speak with.
Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. “It’s no use
speaking to it,” she thought, “till its ears have come, or at least one
of them.” In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put
down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad
she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there
was enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.
“I don’t think they play at all fairly,” Alice began, in rather a
complaining tone, “and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can’t hear
oneself speak—and they don’t seem to have any rules in particular; at
least, if there are, nobody attends to them—and you’ve no idea how
confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there’s the
arch I’ve got to go through next walking about at the other end of the
ground—and I should have croqueted the Queen’s hedgehog just now, only
it ran away when it saw mine coming!”
“How do you like the Queen?” said the Cat in a low voice.
“Not at all,” said Alice: “she’s so extremely—” Just then she noticed
that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on,
“—likely to win, that it’s hardly worth while finishing the game.”
The Queen smiled and passed on.
“Who are you talking to?” said the King, going up to Alice, and
looking at the Cat’s head with great curiosity.
“It’s a friend of mine—a Cheshire Cat,” said Alice: “allow me to
introduce it.”
“I don’t like the look of it at all,” said the King: “however, it may
kiss my hand if it likes.”
“I’d rather not,” the Cat remarked.
“Don’t be impertinent,” said the King, “and don’t look at me like
that!” He got behind Alice as he spoke.
“A cat may look at a king,” said Alice. “I’ve read that in some book,
but I don’t remember where.”
“Well, it must be removed,” said the King very decidedly, and he called
the Queen, who was passing at the moment, “My dear! I wish you would
have this cat removed!”
The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or
small. “Off with his head!” she said, without even looking round.
“I’ll fetch the executioner myself,” said the King eagerly, and he
hurried off.
Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going
on, as she heard the Queen’s voice in the distance, screaming with
passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be
executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look
of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew
whether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.
The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed
to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the
other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to
the other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a
helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.
By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight
was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: “but it doesn’t
matter much,” thought Alice, “as all the arches are gone from this side
of the ground.” So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not
escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her
friend.
When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite
a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between
the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once,
while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.
The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle
the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they
all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly
what they said.
The executioner’s argument was, that you couldn’t cut off a head unless
there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a
thing before, and he wasn’t going to begin at his time of life.
The King’s argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren’t to talk nonsense.
The Queen’s argument was, that if something wasn’t done about it in
less than no time she’d have everybody executed, all round. (It was
this last remark that had made the whole party look so grave and
anxious.)
Alice could think of nothing else to say but “It belongs to the
Duchess: you’d better ask her about it.”
“She’s in prison,” the Queen said to the executioner: “fetch her here.”
And the executioner went off like an arrow.
The Cat’s head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by the
time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely disappeared; so
the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it,
while the rest of the party went back to the game.
The Mock Turtle’s Story
“You can’t think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!”
said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice’s,
and they walked off together.
Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought
to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so
savage when they met in the kitchen.
“When I’m a Duchess,” she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful
tone though), “I won’t have any pepper in my kitchen at all. Soup
does very well without—Maybe it’s always pepper that makes people
hot-tempered,” she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new
kind of rule, “and vinegar that makes them sour—and camomile that makes
them bitter—and—and barley-sugar and such things that make children
sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew that: then they wouldn’t be
so stingy about it, you know—”
She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little
startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. “You’re thinking
about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I can’t
tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in
a bit.”
“Perhaps it hasn’t one,” Alice ventured to remark.
“Tut, tut, child!” said the Duchess. “Everything’s got a moral, if only
you can find it.” And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice’s side as
she spoke.
Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the
Duchess was very ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the
right height to rest her chin upon Alice’s shoulder, and it was an
uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she
bore it as well as she could.
“The game’s going on rather better now,” she said, by way of keeping up
the conversation a little.
“’Tis so,” said the Duchess: “and the moral of that is—‘Oh, ’tis love,
’tis love, that makes the world go round!’”
“Somebody said,” Alice whispered, “that it’s done by everybody minding
their own business!”
“Ah, well! It means much the same thing,” said the Duchess, digging her
sharp little chin into Alice’s shoulder as she added, “and the moral of
that is—‘Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of
themselves.’”
“How fond she is of finding morals in things!” Alice thought to
herself.
“I dare say you’re wondering why I don’t put my arm round your waist,”
the Duchess said after a pause: “the reason is, that I’m doubtful about
the temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?”
“He might bite,” Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious
to have the experiment tried.
“Very true,” said the Duchess: “flamingoes and mustard both bite. And
the moral of that is—‘Birds of a feather flock together.’”
“Only mustard isn’t a bird,” Alice remarked.
“Right, as usual,” said the Duchess: “what a clear way you have of
putting things!”
“It’s a mineral, I think,” said Alice.
“Of course it is,” said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to
everything that Alice said; “there’s a large mustard-mine near here.
And the moral of that is—‘The more there is of mine, the less there is
of yours.’”
“Oh, I know!” exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last
remark, “it’s a vegetable. It doesn’t look like one, but it is.”
“I quite agree with you,” said the Duchess; “and the moral of that
is—‘Be what you would seem to be’—or if you’d like it put more
simply—‘Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might
appear to others that what you were or might have been was not
otherwise than what you had been would have appeared to them to be
otherwise.’”
“I think I should understand that better,” Alice said very politely,
“if I had it written down: but I can’t quite follow it as you say it.”
“That’s nothing to what I could say if I chose,” the Duchess replied,
in a pleased tone.
“Pray don’t trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,” said
Alice.
“Oh, don’t talk about trouble!” said the Duchess. “I make you a present
of everything I’ve said as yet.”
“A cheap sort of present!” thought Alice. “I’m glad they don’t give
birthday presents like that!” But she did not venture to say it out
loud.
“Thinking again?” the Duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp
little chin.
“I’ve a right to think,” said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to
feel a little worried.
“Just about as much right,” said the Duchess, “as pigs have to fly; and
the m—”
But here, to Alice’s great surprise, the Duchess’s voice died away,
even in the middle of her favourite word ‘moral,’ and the arm that was
linked into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the
Queen in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a
thunderstorm.
“A fine day, your Majesty!” the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.
“Now, I give you fair warning,” shouted the Queen, stamping on the
ground as she spoke; “either you or your head must be off, and that in
about half no time! Take your choice!”
The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.
“Let’s go on with the game,” the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was too
much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the
croquet-ground.
The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen’s absence, and were
resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried
back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment’s delay
would cost them their lives.
All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling
with the other players, and shouting “Off with his head!” or “Off with
her head!” Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the
soldiers, who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so
that by the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and
all the players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody
and under sentence of execution.
Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, “Have
you seen the Mock Turtle yet?”
“No,” said Alice. “I don’t even know what a Mock Turtle is.”
“It’s the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,” said the Queen.
“I never saw one, or heard of one,” said Alice.
“Come on, then,” said the Queen, “and he shall tell you his history,”
As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice,
to the company generally, “You are all pardoned.” “Come, that’s a
good thing!” she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the
number of executions the Queen had ordered.
They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun. (If
you don’t know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) “Up, lazy
thing!” said the Queen, “and take this young lady to see the Mock
Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after some
executions I have ordered;” and she walked off, leaving Alice alone
with the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the creature,
but on the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it
as to go after that savage Queen: so she waited.
The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till
she was out of sight: then it chuckled. “What fun!” said the Gryphon,
half to itself, half to Alice.
“What is the fun?” said Alice.
“Why, she,” said the Gryphon. “It’s all her fancy, that: they never
executes nobody, you know. Come on!”
“Everybody says ‘come on!’ here,” thought Alice, as she went slowly
after it: “I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!”
They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance,
sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came
nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. She
pitied him deeply. “What is his sorrow?” she asked the Gryphon, and the
Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, “It’s all
his fancy, that: he hasn’t got no sorrow, you know. Come on!”
So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyes
full of tears, but said nothing.
“This here young lady,” said the Gryphon, “she wants for to know your
history, she do.”
“I’ll tell it her,” said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: “sit
down, both of you, and don’t speak a word till I’ve finished.”
So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to
herself, “I don’t see how he can ever finish, if he doesn’t begin.”
But she waited patiently.
“Once,” said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, “I was a real
Turtle.”
These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an
occasional exclamation of “Hjckrrh!” from the Gryphon, and the constant
heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and
saying, “Thank you, sir, for your interesting story,” but she could not
help thinking there must be more to come, so she sat still and said
nothing.
“When we were little,” the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,
though still sobbing a little now and then, “we went to school in the
sea. The master was an old Turtle—we used to call him Tortoise—”
“Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn’t one?” Alice asked.
“We called him Tortoise because he taught us,” said the Mock Turtle
angrily: “really you are very dull!”
“You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question,” added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked
at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the
Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, “Drive on, old fellow! Don’t be all
day about it!” and he went on in these words:
“Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn’t believe it—”
“I never said I didn’t!” interrupted Alice.
“You did,” said the Mock Turtle.
“Hold your tongue!” added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak again.
The Mock Turtle went on.
“We had the best of educations—in fact, we went to school every day—”
“I’ve been to a day-school, too,” said Alice; “you needn’t be so
proud as all that.”
“With extras?” asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.
“Yes,” said Alice, “we learned French and music.”
“And washing?” said the Mock Turtle.
“Certainly not!” said Alice indignantly.
“Ah! then yours wasn’t a really good school,” said the Mock Turtle in a
tone of great relief. “Now at ours they had at the end of the bill,
‘French, music, and washing—extra.’”
“You couldn’t have wanted it much,” said Alice; “living at the bottom
of the sea.”
“I couldn’t afford to learn it.” said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. “I
only took the regular course.”
“What was that?” inquired Alice.
“Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,” the Mock Turtle
replied; “and then the different branches of Arithmetic—Ambition,
Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.”
“I never heard of ‘Uglification,’” Alice ventured to say. “What is it?”
The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. “What! Never heard of
uglifying!” it exclaimed. “You know what to beautify is, I suppose?”
“Yes,” said Alice doubtfully: “it means—to—make—anything—prettier.”
“Well, then,” the Gryphon went on, “if you don’t know what to uglify
is, you are a simpleton.”
Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so
she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said “What else had you to learn?”
“Well, there was Mystery,” the Mock Turtle replied, counting off the
subjects on his flappers, “—Mystery, ancient and modern, with
Seaography: then Drawling—the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel,
that used to come once a week: he taught us Drawling, Stretching, and
Fainting in Coils.”
“What was that like?” said Alice.
“Well, I can’t show it you myself,” the Mock Turtle said: “I’m too
stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it.”
“Hadn’t time,” said the Gryphon: “I went to the Classics master,
though. He was an old crab, he was.”
“I never went to him,” the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: “he taught
Laughing and Grief, they used to say.”
“So he did, so he did,” said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both
creatures hid their faces in their paws.
“And how many hours a day did you do lessons?” said Alice, in a hurry
to change the subject.
“Ten hours the first day,” said the Mock Turtle: “nine the next, and so
on.”
“What a curious plan!” exclaimed Alice.
“That’s the reason they’re called lessons,” the Gryphon remarked:
“because they lessen from day to day.”
This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little
before she made her next remark. “Then the eleventh day must have been
a holiday?”
“Of course it was,” said the Mock Turtle.
“And how did you manage on the twelfth?” Alice went on eagerly.
“That’s enough about lessons,” the Gryphon interrupted in a very
decided tone: “tell her something about the games now.”
The Lobster Quadrille
The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across
his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or
two sobs choked his voice. “Same as if he had a bone in his throat,”
said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in
the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears
running down his cheeks, he went on again:—
“You may not have lived much under the sea—” (“I haven’t,” said
Alice)—“and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster—”
(Alice began to say “I once tasted—” but checked herself hastily, and
said “No, never”) “—so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a
Lobster Quadrille is!”
“No, indeed,” said Alice. “What sort of a dance is it?”
“Why,” said the Gryphon, “you first form into a line along the
sea-shore—”
“Two lines!” cried the Mock Turtle. “Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on;
then, when you’ve cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way—”
“That generally takes some time,” interrupted the Gryphon.
“—you advance twice—”
“Each with a lobster as a partner!” cried the Gryphon.
“Of course,” the Mock Turtle said: “advance twice, set to partners—”
“—change lobsters, and retire in same order,” continued the Gryphon.
“Then, you know,” the Mock Turtle went on, “you throw the—”
“The lobsters!” shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.
“—as far out to sea as you can—”
“Swim after them!” screamed the Gryphon.
“Turn a somersault in the sea!” cried the Mock Turtle, capering wildly
about.
“Change lobsters again!” yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.
“Back to land again, and that’s all the first figure,” said the Mock
Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had
been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very
sadly and quietly, and looked at Alice.
“It must be a very pretty dance,” said Alice timidly.
“Would you like to see a little of it?” said the Mock Turtle.
“Very much indeed,” said Alice.
“Come, let’s try the first figure!” said the Mock Turtle to the
Gryphon. “We can do without lobsters, you know. Which shall sing?”
“Oh, you sing,” said the Gryphon. “I’ve forgotten the words.”
So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and
then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their
forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly
and sadly:—
“Will you walk a little faster?” said a whiting to a snail.
“There’s a porpoise close behind us, and he’s treading on my tail.
See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
They are waiting on the shingle—will you come and join the dance?
Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance?
Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?
“You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!”
But the snail replied “Too far, too far!” and gave a look askance—
Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.
“What matters it how far we go?” his scaly friend replied.
“There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
The further off from England the nearer is to France—
Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.
Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance?
Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?”
“Thank you, it’s a very interesting dance to watch,” said Alice,
feeling very glad that it was over at last: “and I do so like that
curious song about the whiting!”
“Oh, as to the whiting,” said the Mock Turtle, “they—you’ve seen them,
of course?”
“Yes,” said Alice, “I’ve often seen them at dinn—” she checked herself
hastily.
“I don’t know where Dinn may be,” said the Mock Turtle, “but if you’ve
seen them so often, of course you know what they’re like.”
“I believe so,” Alice replied thoughtfully. “They have their tails in
their mouths—and they’re all over crumbs.”
“You’re wrong about the crumbs,” said the Mock Turtle: “crumbs would
all wash off in the sea. But they have their tails in their mouths;
and the reason is—” here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his
eyes.—“Tell her about the reason and all that,” he said to the Gryphon.
“The reason is,” said the Gryphon, “that they would go with the
lobsters to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to
fall a long way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths. So they
couldn’t get them out again. That’s all.”
“Thank you,” said Alice, “it’s very interesting. I never knew so much
about a whiting before.”
“I can tell you more than that, if you like,” said the Gryphon. “Do you
know why it’s called a whiting?”
“I never thought about it,” said Alice. “Why?”
“It does the boots and shoes,” the Gryphon replied very solemnly.
Alice was thoroughly puzzled. “Does the boots and shoes!” she repeated
in a wondering tone.
“Why, what are your shoes done with?” said the Gryphon. “I mean, what
makes them so shiny?”
Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her
answer. “They’re done with blacking, I believe.”
“Boots and shoes under the sea,” the Gryphon went on in a deep voice,
“are done with a whiting. Now you know.”
“And what are they made of?” Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.
“Soles and eels, of course,” the Gryphon replied rather impatiently:
“any shrimp could have told you that.”
“If I’d been the whiting,” said Alice, whose thoughts were still
running on the song, “I’d have said to the porpoise, ‘Keep back,
please: we don’t want you with us!’”
“They were obliged to have him with them,” the Mock Turtle said: “no
wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.”
“Wouldn’t it really?” said Alice in a tone of great surprise.
“Of course not,” said the Mock Turtle: “why, if a fish came to me,
and told me he was going a journey, I should say ‘With what porpoise?’”
“Don’t you mean ‘purpose’?” said Alice.
“I mean what I say,” the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. And
the Gryphon added “Come, let’s hear some of your adventures.”
“I could tell you my adventures—beginning from this morning,” said
Alice a little timidly: “but it’s no use going back to yesterday,
because I was a different person then.”
“Explain all that,” said the Mock Turtle.
“No, no! The adventures first,” said the Gryphon in an impatient tone:
“explanations take such a dreadful time.”
So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first
saw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first,
the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened
their eyes and mouths so very wide, but she gained courage as she
went on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part
about her repeating “You are old, Father William,” to the
Caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and then the Mock
Turtle drew a long breath, and said “That’s very curious.”
“It’s all about as curious as it can be,” said the Gryphon.
“It all came different!” the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. “I
should like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her to
begin.” He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of
authority over Alice.
“Stand up and repeat ‘’Tis the voice of the sluggard,’” said the
Gryphon.
“How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!”
thought Alice; “I might as well be at school at once.” However, she got
up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster
Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came
very queer indeed:—
“’Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,
“You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.”
As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.”
[later editions continued as follows
When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
“That’s different from what I used to say when I was a child,” said
the Gryphon.
“Well, I never heard it before,” said the Mock Turtle; “but it sounds
uncommon nonsense.”
Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,
wondering if anything would ever happen in a natural way again.
“I should like to have it explained,” said the Mock Turtle.
“She can’t explain it,” said the Gryphon hastily. “Go on with the next
verse.”
“But about his toes?” the Mock Turtle persisted. “How could he turn
them out with his nose, you know?”
“It’s the first position in dancing.” Alice said; but was dreadfully
puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.
“Go on with the next verse,” the Gryphon repeated impatiently: “it
begins ‘I passed by his garden.’”
Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come
wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:—
“I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie—”
[later editions continued as follows
The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
“What is the use of repeating all that stuff,” the Mock Turtle
interrupted, “if you don’t explain it as you go on? It’s by far the
most confusing thing I ever heard!”
“Yes, I think you’d better leave off,” said the Gryphon: and Alice was
only too glad to do so.
“Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?” the Gryphon
went on. “Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?”
“Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,” Alice
replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone,
“Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her ‘Turtle Soup,’ will you, old
fellow?”
The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked
with sobs, to sing this:—
“Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
Waiting in a hot tureen!
Who for such dainties would not stoop?
Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
    Beautiful, beautiful Soup!
“Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
Game, or any other dish?
Who would not give all else for two p
ennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
    Beautiful, beauti—FUL SOUP!”
“Chorus again!” cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begun
to repeat it, when a cry of “The trial’s beginning!” was heard in the
distance.
“Come on!” cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it hurried
off, without waiting for the end of the song.
“What trial is it?” Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only
answered “Come on!” and ran the faster, while more and more faintly
came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:—
“Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
    Beautiful, beautiful Soup!”
Who Stole the Tarts?
The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they
arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them—all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was
standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard
him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one
hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the
court was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so
good, that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them—“I wish they’d
get the trial done,” she thought, “and hand round the refreshments!”
But there seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at
everything about her, to pass away the time.
Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read
about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew
the name of nearly everything there. “That’s the judge,” she said to
herself, “because of his great wig.”
The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the
wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he
did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.
“And that’s the jury-box,” thought Alice, “and those twelve creatures,”
(she was obliged to say “creatures,” you see, because some of them were
animals, and some were birds,) “I suppose they are the jurors.” She
said this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather
proud of it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little
girls of her age knew the meaning of it at all. However, “jury-men”
would have done just as well.
The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. “What are
they doing?” Alice whispered to the Gryphon. “They can’t have anything
to put down yet, before the trial’s begun.”
“They’re putting down their names,” the Gryphon whispered in reply,
“for fear they should forget them before the end of the trial.”
“Stupid things!” Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she
stopped hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, “Silence in the
court!” and the King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round,
to make out who was talking.
Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders,
that all the jurors were writing down “stupid things!” on their slates,
and she could even make out that one of them didn’t know how to spell
“stupid,” and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. “A nice
muddle their slates’ll be in before the trial’s over!” thought Alice.
One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course, Alice
could not stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and
very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly
that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make out
at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he
was obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this
was of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.
“Herald, read the accusation!” said the King.
On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then
unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:—
“The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
    All on a summer day:
The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
    And took them quite away!”
“Consider your verdict,” the King said to the jury.
“Not yet, not yet!” the Rabbit hastily interrupted. “There’s a great
deal to come before that!”
“Call the first witness,” said the King; and the White Rabbit blew
three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, “First witness!”
The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one hand
and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. “I beg pardon, your
Majesty,” he began, “for bringing these in: but I hadn’t quite finished
my tea when I was sent for.”
“You ought to have finished,” said the King. “When did you begin?”
The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the
court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. “Fourteenth of March, I think it
was,” he said.
“Fifteenth,” said the March Hare.
“Sixteenth,” added the Dormouse.
“Write that down,” the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerly
wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and
reduced the answer to shillings and pence.
“Take off your hat,” the King said to the Hatter.
“It isn’t mine,” said the Hatter.
“Stolen!” the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made
a memorandum of the fact.
“I keep them to sell,” the Hatter added as an explanation; “I’ve none
of my own. I’m a hatter.”
Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the Hatter,
who turned pale and fidgeted.
“Give your evidence,” said the King; “and don’t be nervous, or I’ll
have you executed on the spot.”
This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting
from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in his
confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the
bread-and-butter.
Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled
her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to
grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave
the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was
as long as there was room for her.
“I wish you wouldn’t squeeze so.” said the Dormouse, who was sitting
next to her. “I can hardly breathe.”
“I can’t help it,” said Alice very meekly: “I’m growing.”
“You’ve no right to grow here,” said the Dormouse.
“Don’t talk nonsense,” said Alice more boldly: “you know you’re growing
too.”
“Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,” said the Dormouse: “not in
that ridiculous fashion.” And he got up very sulkily and crossed over
to the other side of the court.
All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and,
just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers
of the court, “Bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!”
on which the wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes
off.
“Give your evidence,” the King repeated angrily, “or I’ll have you
executed, whether you’re nervous or not.”
“I’m a poor man, your Majesty,” the Hatter began, in a trembling voice,
“—and I hadn’t begun my tea—not above a week or so—and what with the
bread-and-butter getting so thin—and the twinkling of the tea—”
“The twinkling of the what?” said the King.
“It began with the tea,” the Hatter replied.
“Of course twinkling begins with a T!” said the King sharply. “Do you
take me for a dunce? Go on!”
“I’m a poor man,” the Hatter went on, “and most things twinkled after
that—only the March Hare said—”
“I didn’t!” the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.
“You did!” said the Hatter.
“I deny it!” said the March Hare.
“He denies it,” said the King: “leave out that part.”
“Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said—” the Hatter went on, looking
anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied
nothing, being fast asleep.
“After that,” continued the Hatter, “I cut some more bread-and-butter—”
“But what did the Dormouse say?” one of the jury asked.
“That I can’t remember,” said the Hatter.
“You must remember,” remarked the King, “or I’ll have you executed.”
The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went
down on one knee. “I’m a poor man, your Majesty,” he began.
“You’re a very poor speaker,” said the King.
Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by
the officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just
explain to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied
up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig,
head first, and then sat upon it.)
“I’m glad I’ve seen that done,” thought Alice. “I’ve so often read in
the newspapers, at the end of trials, “There was some attempts at
applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the
court,” and I never understood what it meant till now.”
“If that’s all you know about it, you may stand down,” continued the
King.
“I can’t go no lower,” said the Hatter: “I’m on the floor, as it is.”
“Then you may sit down,” the King replied.
Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.
“Come, that finished the guinea-pigs!” thought Alice. “Now we shall get
on better.”
“I’d rather finish my tea,” said the Hatter, with an anxious look at
the Queen, who was reading the list of singers.
“You may go,” said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the court,
without even waiting to put his shoes on.
“—and just take his head off outside,” the Queen added to one of the
officers: but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get
to the door.
“Call the next witness!” said the King.
The next witness was the Duchess’s cook. She carried the pepper-box in
her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the
court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.
“Give your evidence,” said the King.
“Shan’t,” said the cook.
The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a low voice,
“Your Majesty must cross-examine this witness.”
“Well, if I must, I must,” the King said, with a melancholy air, and,
after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were
nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, “What are tarts made of?”
“Pepper, mostly,” said the cook.
“Treacle,” said a sleepy voice behind her.
“Collar that Dormouse,” the Queen shrieked out. “Behead that Dormouse!
Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his
whiskers!”
For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the Dormouse
turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had
disappeared.
“Never mind!” said the King, with an air of great relief. “Call the
next witness.” And he added in an undertone to the Queen, “Really, my
dear, you must cross-examine the next witness. It quite makes my
forehead ache!”
Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling
very curious to see what the next witness would be like, “—for they
haven’t got much evidence yet,” she said to herself. Imagine her
surprise, when the White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill
little voice, the name “Alice!”
Alice’s Evidence
“Here!” cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how
large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such
a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt,
upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there
they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of
goldfish she had accidentally upset the week before.
“Oh, I beg your pardon!” she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and
began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident
of the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of
idea that they must be collected at once and put back into the
jury-box, or they would die.
“The trial cannot proceed,” said the King in a very grave voice, “until
all the jurymen are back in their proper places—all,” he repeated
with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said so.
Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put
the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its
tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon
got it out again, and put it right; “not that it signifies much,” she
said to herself; “I should think it would be quite as much use in the
trial one way up as the other.”
As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being
upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to
them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the
accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do
anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the
court.
“What do you know about this business?” the King said to Alice.
“Nothing,” said Alice.
“Nothing whatever?” persisted the King.
“Nothing whatever,” said Alice.
“That’s very important,” the King said, turning to the jury. They were
just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White
Rabbit interrupted: “Unimportant, your Majesty means, of course,” he
said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as
he spoke.
“Unimportant, of course, I meant,” the King hastily said, and went on
to himself in an undertone,
“important—unimportant—unimportant—important—” as if he were trying
which word sounded best.
Some of the jury wrote it down “important,” and some “unimportant.”
Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates;
“but it doesn’t matter a bit,” she thought to herself.
At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in
his note-book, cackled out “Silence!” and read out from his book, “Rule
Forty-two. All persons more than a mile high to leave the court.”
Everybody looked at Alice.
“I’m not a mile high,” said Alice.
“You are,” said the King.
“Nearly two miles high,” added the Queen.
“Well, I shan’t go, at any rate,” said Alice: “besides, that’s not a
regular rule: you invented it just now.”
“It’s the oldest rule in the book,” said the King.
“Then it ought to be Number One,” said Alice.
The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. “Consider your
verdict,” he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.
“There’s more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,” said the
White Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; “this paper has just been
picked up.”
“What’s in it?” said the Queen.
“I haven’t opened it yet,” said the White Rabbit, “but it seems to be a
letter, written by the prisoner to—to somebody.”
“It must have been that,” said the King, “unless it was written to
nobody, which isn’t usual, you know.”
“Who is it directed to?” said one of the jurymen.
“It isn’t directed at all,” said the White Rabbit; “in fact, there’s
nothing written on the outside.” He unfolded the paper as he spoke,
and added “It isn’t a letter, after all: it’s a set of verses.”
“Are they in the prisoner’s handwriting?” asked another of the jurymen.
“No, they’re not,” said the White Rabbit, “and that’s the queerest
thing about it.” (The jury all looked puzzled.)
“He must have imitated somebody else’s hand,” said the King. (The jury
all brightened up again.)
“Please your Majesty,” said the Knave, “I didn’t write it, and they
can’t prove I did: there’s no name signed at the end.”
“If you didn’t sign it,” said the King, “that only makes the matter
worse. You must have meant some mischief, or else you’d have signed
your name like an honest man.”
There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really
clever thing the King had said that day.
“That proves his guilt,” said the Queen.
“It proves nothing of the sort!” said Alice. “Why, you don’t even know
what they’re about!”
“Read them,” said the King.
The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. “Where shall I begin, please
your Majesty?” he asked.
“Begin at the beginning,” the King said gravely, “and go on till you
come to the end: then stop.”
These were the verses the White Rabbit read:—
“They told me you had been to her,
    And mentioned me to him:
She gave me a good character,
    But said I could not swim.
He sent them word I had not gone
    (We know it to be true):
If she should push the matter on,
    What would become of you?
I gave her one, they gave him two,
    You gave us three or more;
They all returned from him to you,
    Though they were mine before.
If I or she should chance to be
    Involved in this affair,
He trusts to you to set them free,
    Exactly as we were.
My notion was that you had been
    (Before she had this fit)
An obstacle that came between
    Him, and ourselves, and it.
Don’t let him know she liked them best,
    For this must ever be
A secret, kept from all the rest,
    Between yourself and me.”
“That’s the most important piece of evidence we’ve heard yet,” said the
King, rubbing his hands; “so now let the jury—”
“If any one of them can explain it,” said Alice, (she had grown so
large in the last few minutes that she wasn’t a bit afraid of
interrupting him,) “I’ll give him sixpence. I don’t believe there’s
an atom of meaning in it.”
The jury all wrote down on their slates, “She doesn’t believe there’s
an atom of meaning in it,” but none of them attempted to explain the
paper.
“If there’s no meaning in it,” said the King, “that saves a world of
trouble, you know, as we needn’t try to find any. And yet I don’t
know,” he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at
them with one eye; “I seem to see some meaning in them, after all.
“—said I could not swim—” you can’t swim, can you?” he added, turning
to the Knave.
The Knave shook his head sadly. “Do I look like it?” he said. (Which he
certainly did not, being made entirely of cardboard.)
“All right, so far,” said the King, and he went on muttering over the
verses to himself: “‘We know it to be true—’ that’s the jury, of
course—‘I gave her one, they gave him two—’ why, that must be what he
did with the tarts, you know—”
“But, it goes on ‘they all returned from him to you,’” said Alice.
“Why, there they are!” said the King triumphantly, pointing to the
tarts on the table. “Nothing can be clearer than that. Then
again—‘before she had this fit—’ you never had fits, my dear, I
think?” he said to the Queen.
“Never!” said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard
as she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his
slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily
began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long
as it lasted.)
“Then the words don’t fit you,” said the King, looking round the
court with a smile. There was a dead silence.
“It’s a pun!” the King added in an offended tone, and everybody
laughed, “Let the jury consider their verdict,” the King said, for
about the twentieth time that day.
“No, no!” said the Queen. “Sentence first—verdict afterwards.”
“Stuff and nonsense!” said Alice loudly. “The idea of having the
sentence first!”
“Hold your tongue!” said the Queen, turning purple.
“I won’t!” said Alice.
“Off with her head!” the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody
moved.
“Who cares for you?” said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by
this time.) “You’re nothing but a pack of cards!”
At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon
her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and
tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her
head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.
“Wake up, Alice dear!” said her sister; “Why, what a long sleep you’ve
had!”
“Oh, I’ve had such a curious dream!” said Alice, and she told her
sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange
Adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she
had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, “It was a curious
dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it’s getting late.”
So Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might,
what a wonderful dream it had been.
But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her
hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all
her wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion,
and this was her dream:—
First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny
hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were
looking up into hers—she could hear the very tones of her voice, and
see that queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair
that would always get into her eyes—and still as she listened, or
seemed to listen, the whole place around her became alive with the
strange creatures of her little sister’s dream.
The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by—the
frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool—she
could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends
shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen
ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution—once more the pig-baby
was sneezing on the Duchess’s knee, while plates and dishes crashed
around it—once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the
Lizard’s slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable Mock
Turtle.
So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all
would change to dull reality—the grass would be only rustling in the
wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds—the rattling
teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen’s shrill
cries to the voice of the shepherd boy—and the sneeze of the baby, the
shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change
(she knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard—while the
lowing of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock
Turtle’s heavy sobs.
Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers
would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would
keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her
childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children,
and make their eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale,
perhaps even with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she
would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all
their simple joys, remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer
or
36 Tales about
the Pursuit of Pleasure
I wish Giovanni would kiss me.
Oh, but there are so many reasons why this would be a terrible idea. To begin with, Giovanni is ten years younger than I am, and - like most Italian guys in their twenties - he still lives with his mother. These facts make him an unlikely romantic partner for me, considering that I am an educated American woman in my mid-thirties, who has just come through a failed marriage and an interminable divorce, followed immediately by a passionate love affair that ended in heartbreak. This has left me feeling about seven thousand years old. This is why I have been alone for many months now. This is why, in fact, I have decided to spend this entire year in celibacy.
Giovanni is my Tandem Exchange Partner. He teaches me Italian and I teach him English. I discovered Giovanni a few weeks after I'd arrived in Rome, thanks to a big Internet cafe. He had posted a flier on the bulletin board explaining that a native Italian speaker was seeking a native English speaker for conversational language practice. Right beside his appeal was another flier with the same request, word-for-word identical in every way. The only difference was the contact information. One flier listed an e-mail address for somebody named Giovanni; the other introduced somebody named Dario. But even the home phone number was the same.
Using my keen intuitive powers, I e-mailed both men at the same time, asking in Italian, "Are you perhaps brothers?"
Giovanni wrote back: "Even better. Twins!"
After meeting the boys, I began to wonder if perhaps I should change my rule a bit about remaining celibate this year. For instance, perhaps I could remain totally celibate except for keeping a pair of handsome twenty-five-year-old Italian twin brothers as lovers...
But, no.
No and no.
I look for healing and peace that can only come from solitude.
Anyway, by now, by the middle of November, Giovanni and I have become friends. As for Dario - I have introduced him to my adorable little Swedish friend Sofie, and they've been sharing their evenings in Rome in a different way. But Giovanni and I, we only talk. Well, we eat and we talk. We have been eating and talking for many pleasant weeks now, sharing pizzas and gentle grammatical corrections, and tonight has been no exception.
Now it is midnight and foggy, and Giovanni is walking me home to my apartment through these back streets of Rome. We are at my door. We face each other. He gives me a warm hug.
"Good night, my dear Liz," he says.
"Buona notte, caro mio" I reply.
I walk up the stairs to my fourth-floor apartment, all alone. Another solitary bedtime in Rome. Another long night's sleep ahead of me.
I am alone, I am all alone, I am completely alone.
Grasping this reality, I drop to my knees and press my forehead against the floor. There, I offer up to the universe a prayer of thanks.
First in English.
Then in Italian.
And then in Sanskrit
And since I am already down there in prayer on the floor, let me hold that position as I reach back in time three years earlier to the moment when this story began - a moment which also found me in this exact same posture: on my knees, on a floor, praying.
Everything else about that scene was different, though. That time, I was not in Rome but in the upstairs bathroom of the big house in the suburbs of New York which I'd recently purchased with my husband. It was in November, at around three o'clock in the morning. My husband was sleeping in our bed. I was hiding in the bathroom sobbing. Sobbing so hard, in fact, that a great lake of tears was spreading before me on the bathroom tiles.
I don't want to be married anymore.
I don't want to live in this big house.
I don't want to have a baby.
But I was supposed to want to have a baby. I was thirty-one years old. My husband and I - who had been together for eight years, married for six - had built our entire life around the common expectation that, after passing the age of thirty, I would want to have children. But I didn't. I kept waiting to want to have a baby, but it didn't happen. And I know what it feels like to want something, believe me. When the magazine I worked for was going to send me to New Zealand, to write an article about the search for giant squid, I felt delight. And I thought, "Until I can feel as ecstatic about having a baby as I felt about going to New Zealand to search for a giant squid, I cannot have a baby."
I don't want to be married anymore.
In daylight hours, I refused that thought, but at night it came to me again and again. What a catastrophe. I had actively participated in every moment of the creation of this life - so why did I feel so overwhelmed with duty, tired of being the breadwinner and the housekeeper and the social coordinator and the dog-walker and the wife and the soon-to-be mother, and - somewhere in my stolen moments - a writer...?
I don't want to be married anymore.
My husband was sleeping in the other room, in our bed. I equal parts loved him and could not stand him. I couldn't wake him to share in my distress - what would be the point? We both knew there was something wrong with me, and he'd been losing patience with it. We'd been fighting and crying, and we were tired in that way that only a couple whose marriage is collapsing can be tired.
The many reasons I didn't want to be this man's wife anymore are too personal and too sad to share here. The chronicle of our marriage's failure will remain untold here. I also will not discuss here all the reasons why I did still want to be his wife, or all his wonderfulness, or why I loved him and why I had married him and why I was unable to imagine life without him. I won't open any of that. I can only say that, on this night, he was still my lighthouse and my albatross in equal measure. The only thing more unthinkable than leaving was staying; the only thing more impossible than staying was leaving. I didn't want to destroy anything or anybody. I just wanted to slip quietly out the back door, without causing any consequences, and then not stop running until I reached Greenland.
This part of my story is not a happy one, I know. But I share it here because something occurred on that bathroom floor that changed forever my life. What happened was that I started to pray.
You know - like, to God.
Now, this was a first for me. And since this is the first time I have introduced that word - GOD - into my book, and since this is a word which will appear many times again throughout these pages, it seems only fair that I pause here for a moment to explain exactly what I mean when I say that word.
Let me first explain why I use the word God, when I could just as easily use the words Jehovah, Allah, Shiva, Brahma, Vishnu or Zeus. Alternatively, I could call God "That," which is how the ancient Sanskrit scriptures say it. But that "That" feels impersonal to me - a thing, not a being - and I myself cannot pray to a That. I need a proper name, in order to fully sense a personal attendance. For this same reason, when I pray, I do not address my prayers to The Universe, The Force, The Supreme Self, The Whole, The Light, or The Higher Power.
I have nothing against any of these terms. I feel they are all equal because they are all equally adequate and inadequate descriptions of the indescribable. But we each do need a functional name for this indescribability, and "God" is the name that feels the warmest to me, so that's what I use.
Culturally, though not theologically, I'm a Christian. I was born a Protestant. And while I really love that great teacher of peace who was called Jesus, I can't swallow that one fixed rule of Christianity insisting that Christ is the only path to God. Strictly speaking, then, I cannot call myself a Christian.
I have always responded with excitement to anyone who has ever said that God does not live in a dogmatic scripture or in a distant throne in the sky, but instead lives very close to us indeed - much closer than we can imagine, breathing right through our own hearts. I respond with gratitude to anyone who has ever voyaged to the center of that heart, and who has then returned to the world with a report for the rest of us that God is an experience of supreme love.
In the end, what I have come to believe about God is simple. When the question is raised, "What kind of God do you believe in?" my answer is easy: "I believe in a magnificent God."
So I spoke to God directly for the first time. In the middle of that dark November crisis I was interested only in saving my life. What I said to God through my sobs was something like this: "Hello, God. How are you? I'm Liz. It's nice to meet you."
That's right - I was speaking to the creator of the universe as though we'd just been introduced at a cocktail party. But we work with what we know in this life, and these are the words I always use at the beginning of a relationship.
"I'm sorry to bother you so late at night," I continued. "But I'm in serious trouble. And I'm sorry I haven't ever spoken directly to you before, but I hope I have always expressed my gratitude for all the blessings that you've given me in my life."
This thought caused me to sob even harder. God waited. I pulled myself together enough to go on: "I am not an expert at praying, as you know. But can you please help me? I am in desperate need of help. I don't know what to do. I need an answer. Please tell me what to do. Please tell me what to do. Please tell me what to do..."
And so the prayer was Please tell me what to do repeated again and again. I don't know how many times I begged. I only know that I begged like someone who was pleading for her life. And the crying went on forever.
Until - quite abruptly - it stopped.
Quite abruptly, I found that I was not crying anymore. I lifted my forehead off the floor and sat up in surprise, wondering if I would see now some Great Being who had taken my weeping away. But nobody was there. I was just alone. But not really alone, either. I was surrounded by something like a little pocket of silence. I was totally still. I don't know when I'd ever felt such stillness.
Then I heard a voice. This was my voice as I had never heard it before. This was my voice, but perfectly wise, calm and compassionate. How can I describe the warmth of affection in that voice, as it gave me the answer that would forever open my faith in the divine?
The voice said: Go back to bed, Liz.
I exhaled.
It was so immediately clear that this was the only thing to do. Any other answer - You Must Divorce Your Husband! or You Must Not Divorce Your Husband!- would not be true wisdom. True wisdom gives the only possible answer at any given moment, and that night, going back to bed was the only possible answer. Go back to bed, said this interior voice, because you don't need to know the final answer right now, at three o'clock in the morning on a Thursday in November. Go back to bed, because I love you. Go back to bed, because the only thing you need to do for now is get some rest and take good care of yourself until you do know the answer. Go back to bed so that, when the storm comes, you'll be strong enough to deal with it. And the storm is coming, dear one. Very soon. But not tonight. Therefore:
Go back to bed, Liz.
I would call what happened that night the beginning of a religious conversation. The first words of an open dialogue that would, eventually, bring me very close to God, indeed.
Seven very difficult months later, I left my husband. When I finally made that decision, I thought the worst of it was over. This only shows how little I knew about divorce.
It was my most sincere belief when I left my husband that we could settle our practical affairs in a few hours with a calculator, some common sense and a bit of goodwill toward the person we'd once loved. My initial suggestion was that we sell the house and divide all the possessions fifty-fifty. He didn't find this suggestion fair. So I changed my offer: What if he took all the possessions and I took all the blame? But not even that offer brought a settlement. Now I was at a loss. I could do nothing now but wait for his counterproposal. My newfound spirituality made it essential to me that we not battle. So this was my position - I would neither defend myself from him, nor would I fight him.
Months passed. My life got stuck at the midpoint as I waited to be released, waited to see what the terms would be. We were living separately (he had moved into our Manhattan apartment), but nothing was resolved.
And then there was David.
All the complications and traumas of those ugly divorce years were multiplied by the drama of David - the guy I fell in love with as I was taking leave of my marriage. I clung to David for escape from marriage. I inflicted upon him my every hope for my salvation and happiness.
I moved right in with David after I left my husband. He was - and he is - a gorgeous young man. A born New Yorker, an actor and writer. Independent, vegetarian, spiritual, seductive. Bigger than life. Bigger than big. Or at least he was to me.
David and I met because he was performing in a play based on short stories I'd written. He was playing a character I had invented. In desperate love, it's always like this, isn't it? In desperate love, we always invent the characters of our partners, demanding that they be what we need of them, and then feeling shocked when they refuse to perform the role we created in the first place.
But, oh, we had such a great time together during those early months when he was still my romantic hero and I was still his living dream. It was excitement and compatibility like I'd never imagined. We invented our own language. We made goals, vows, promises and dinner together.
The first summer of Liz and David looked like any romantic movie you've ever seen. At this time I was still thinking my divorce might proceed gracefully, though I was giving my husband the summer off from talking about it so we could both cool down. Anyway, it was so easy not to think about all that loss in the midst of such happiness. Then that summer ended.
On September 9, 2001, I met with my husband face-to- face for the last time, not realizing that every future meeting would need lawyers between us, to mediate. We had dinner in a restaurant. I tried to talk about our separation, but all we did was fight. He let me know that I was a liar and a traitor and that he hated me and would never speak to me again. Two mornings later I woke up to find that airplanes were crashing into the two tallest buildings of my city. I called my husband to make sure he was safe and we wept together over this disaster, but I did not go to him. Which is how we both knew it was over.
It's not much of an exaggeration to say that I did not sleep again for the next four months.
I shudder now to think of what I imposed on David during those months we lived together, right after 9/11 and my separation from my husband. Imagine his surprise to discover that the happiest, most confident woman he'd ever met was actually a dark hole of bottomless grief. Once again, I could not stop crying. This is when he started to move away, and that's when I saw the other side of my passionate romantic hero - the David who was cool to the touch, in need of more personal space than a herd of American bison.
To be losing David right after the failure of my marriage, and right after the terrorizing of my city, and right during the worst ugliness of divorce... well, this was simply too much.
David and I continued to have fun and compatibility during the days, but at night he visibly moved away from me, more every day, as though I were infectious. I came to fear nighttime. Most mornings, David woke to find me sleeping restlessly on the floor beside his bed, on a pile of bathroom towels, like a dog.
"What happened now?" he asked - another man thoroughly exhausted by me.
I think I lost something like fifteen kilos during that time.
Oh, but it wasn't all bad, those few years...
Because God never slams a door in your face without opening a window, some wonderful things happened to me in the shadow of all that sorrow. For one thing, I finally started learning Italian. Also, I found an Indian Guru. Lastly, I was invited by an elderly medicine man to come and live with him in Indonesia.
I'll explain in sequence.
To begin with, things started to look better when I moved out of David's place in early 2002 and found an apartment of my own for the first time in my life. I saw the apartment almost as a sanatorium for my own recovery. I painted the walls in the warmest colours I could find and bought myself flowers every week, as if I were visiting myself in the hospital. My sister gave me a hotwater bottle as a housewarming gift and I slept with the thing laid against my heart every night.
David and I had broken up for good. Or maybe we hadn't. It's hard to remember now how many times we broke up and joined up over those months.
But during those periods when we were separated, I was practicing living alone. And this experience was bringing a hopeful interior change. When I wasn't feeling suicidal about my divorce, or suicidal about my drama with David, I was actually feeling delighted about my free time, during which I could ask myself the radical new question: "What do you want to do, Liz?"
And when I finally started to answer, I did so cautiously. I would only allow myself to express little baby-step wants. Like:
I want to go to a Yoga class.
I want to leave this party early, so I can go home and read a novel.
I want to buy myself a new pencil box.
Then there was always one strange answer, the same every time:
I want to learn how to speak Italian.
For years, I'd wished I could speak Italian - a language I find more beautiful than roses - but I could never make the practical justification for studying it. What was I going to do with Italian? I wasn't going to move there. It would be more practical to learn how to play the accordion.
But why must everything always have a practical application? In this dark period of loss, did I need any justification for learning Italian other than that it was the only thing I could imagine bringing me any pleasure right now?
And I loved it. Every word was a singing bird, a magic trick for me. I came home through the rain after class, filled a bath with hot water, and lay there in the bubbles reading the Italian dictionary aloud to myself, taking my mind off my divorce pressures and my heartache. The words made me laugh in delight.
Maybe I would move to Italy, after all...
The other important thing that was happening during that time was the newfound adventure of spiritual discipline. An actual living Indian Guru came into my life. I'd been introduced to my Guru the first night I went to David's apartment. I fell in love with them both at the same time. I walked into David's apartment and saw this picture on his dresser of a radiantly beautiful Indian woman and I asked, "Who's that?"
He said, "That is my spiritual teacher."
My heart took a deep breath and announced: "I want a spiritual teacher." I literally mean that it was my heart who said this, speaking through my mouth. I felt this weird division in myself, and my mind stepped out of my body for a moment, turned to face my heart in astonishment and silently asked, "You DO?"
"Yes," replied my heart. "I do."
Then my mind asked my heart, a bit sarcastically: "Since WHEN?"
But I already knew the answer: Since that night on the bathroom floor.
David told me about the international status of this woman, about her tens of thousands of students - many of whom have never met her face-to-face. Still, he said, there was a gathering here in New York City every Tuesday night of the Guru's devotees who came together as a group to meditate and chant.
I joined David the following Tuesday night. I felt my soul rise almost transparent in the wake of the chanting. I walked home that night feeling like the air could move through me. I started going to the chants every Tuesday. Then I started meditating every morning on the ancient Sanskrit mantra the Guru gives to all her students (Om Namah Shivaya, meaning, "I honor the divinity that resides within me"). Then I listened to the Guru speak in person for the first time, and her words gave me chill bumps over my whole body, even across the skin of my face. And when I heard she had an Ashram in India, I knew I must take myself there as quickly as possible.
In the meantime, though, I had to go on a business trip to Indonesia.
An editor from a women's magazine asked if I could go to Bali to write a story about Yoga vacations. When I got to Bali (which is, to be brief, a very nice place) our Yoga teacher asked us, "While you're all here, is there anybody who would like to go visit a ninth-generation Balinese medicine man?" So we all went over to his house one night.
The medicine man was a small, merry-eyed old guy with a mostly toothless mouth. His name was Ketut Liyer. He spoke a thoroughly entertaining kind of English, but there was a translator available for when he got stuck on a word.
Our Yoga teacher had told us in advance that we could each bring one question or problem to the medicine man, and he would try to help us with our troubles.
So when the old man asked me in person what I really wanted, I found true words.
"I want to have a lasting experience of God," I told him. "Sometimes I feel like I understand the divinity of this world, but then I lose it because I get distracted by my petty desires and fears. I want to be with God all the time. But I don't want to be a monk, or totally give up worldly pleasures. I guess what I want to learn is how to live in this world and enjoy its delights, but also devote myself to God."
Ketut said he could answer my question with a picture. He showed me a sketch he'd drawn once during meditation. It was a human figure, standing up, with the hands clasped in prayer. But this figure had four legs, and instead of the head, there was only a bouquet of flowers. There was a small, smiling face drawn over the heart.
"To find the balance you want," Ketut spoke through his translator, "this is what you must become. You must keep your feet grounded so firmly on the earth that it's like you have four legs, instead of two. That way, you can stay in the world. But you must stop looking at the world through your head. You must look through your heart, instead. That way, you will know God."
Then he asked if he could read my palm. I gave him my left hand.
"You have more good luck than anyone I've ever met," he said. "You will live a long time, have many friends, many experiences. You will see the whole world. You only have one problem in your life. You worry too much. Always you get too emotional, too nervous. If I promise you that you will never have any reason in your life to ever worry about anything, will you believe me?"
Nervously I nodded, not believing him.
"For work, you do something creative, and you get paid good money for it. Always you will get paid good money for this thing you do. You are generous with money, maybe too generous. Also one problem. You will lose all your money once in your life. I think maybe it will happen soon."
"I think maybe it will happen in the next six to ten months," I said, thinking about my divorce.
Ketut nodded. "But don't worry," he said. "After you lose all your money, you will get it all right back again. Right away you'll be fine. You will have two marriages in your life. One short, one long. And you will have one child. Late in life, a daughter. Maybe. If you decide... but there is something else." He frowned, then looked up, suddenly absolutely confident: "Someday soon you will come back here to Bali. You must. You will stay here in Bali for three, maybe four months. You will be my friend. Maybe you will live here with my family. I can practice English with you. I never had anybody to practice English with. I think you are good with words. I think this creative work you do is something about words, yes?"
"Yes!" I said. "I'm a writer. I'm a book writer!"
"You are a book writer from New York," he said, in confirmation. "So you will come back here to Bali and live here and teach me English. And I will teach you everything I know."
Then he stood up.
I said, "If you're serious, mister, I'm serious."
He beamed at me toothlessly and said, "See you later, alligator."
Now, I'm the kind of person who, when a ninth-generation Indonesian medicine man tells you that you're destined to move to Bali and live with him for four months, thinks you should make every effort to do that. And this, finally, was how my whole idea about this year of traveling was born. I absolutely needed to get myself back to Indonesia. Problem was, I also wanted to go to India, to visit my Guru's Ashram. To make matters even more confusing, I'd also been dying lately to get over to Italy, so I could practice speaking Italian, but also because I was drawn to the idea of living for a while in a culture where pleasure and beauty are valued.
I wanted worldly enjoyment and divine transcendence - the dual glories of a human life. I wanted what the Greeks called kalos kai agathos, the unique balance of the good and the beautiful. As for how to balance the urge for pleasure against the longing for devotion... well, surely there was a way to learn that trick. And it seemed to me that I maybe could learn this from the Balinese. Maybe even from the medicine man himself.
Four feet on the ground, a head full of flowers, looking at the world through the heart...
So I stopped trying to choose - Italy? India? or Indonesia? - and eventually just admitted that I wanted to travel to all of them. Four months in each place. A year in total. Of course this was a slightly more ambitious dream than "I want to buy myself a new pencil box." But this is what I wanted. And I knew that I wanted to write about it. I wanted to explore the art of pleasure in Italy, the art of devotion in India and, in Indonesia, the art of balancing the two. It was only later, after admitting this dream, that I noticed the happy coincidence that all these countries begin with the letter I. A fairly fortunate sign, it seemed, on a voyage of self-discovery.
The spring of 2003 brought things to a boiling point. A year and a half after I'd left, my husband was finally ready to discuss terms of a settlement. He wanted everything I'd been offering all the time. But he was also asking for things I'd never even considered (a stake in the royalties of books I'd written during the marriage, a cut of possible future movie rights to my work, a share of my retirement accounts, etc.) I protested. Finally, our lawyers came to a compromise and it was starting to look like my husband might actually accept a modified deal. It would cost me dearly, but a fight in the courts would be infinitely more expensive and time-consuming. If he signed the agreement, all I had to do was pay and walk away. Which would be fine with me at this point.
The question was - would he sign? More weeks passed as he contested more details. If he didn't agree to this settlement, we'd have to go to trial. A trial would mean another year - at least - of all this mess. So whatever my husband decided (and he still was my husband, after all), it was going to determine yet another year of my life. The nervousness I felt during this time was something like anticipating the results of a biopsy.
Meanwhile, David and I had broken up again.
And in the middle of all that, I had to go on a small publicity tour connected with publishing one of my books. I took my friend Iva with me for company. Iva is my age but grew up in Beirut, Lebanon. Which means that, while I was playing sports, she was hiding in a bomb shelter five nights out of seven, trying not to die. And I don't know why, but Iva is one of the calmest souls I know. Moreover, she's got what I call "The Phone to the Universe," some kind of Iva-only, open-round-the-clock special channel to the divine.
So we were driving across Kansas, and I was in my normal state of hysteria over this divorce deal - will he sign, will he not sign? - and I said to Iva, "I don't think I can endure another year in court. I wish I could get some divine intervention here. I wish I could write a petition to God, asking for this thing to end."
"So why don't you?"
I explained to Iva my personal opinions about prayer. Namely, that I don't feel comfortable petitioning for specific things from God, because that feels to me like a kind of weakness of faith. Instead, I feel more comfortable praying for the courage to face whatever occurs in my life with calmness, no matter how things turn out.
Iva listened politely, then asked, "Where'd you get that stupid idea?"
"What do you mean?"
"Where did you get the idea you aren't allowed to petition the universe with prayer? You are part of this universe, Liz. You have every right to participate in the actions of the universe, and to let your feelings be known. So put your opinion out there. Believe me - it will at least be taken into consideration."
"Really?" All this was news to me.
"Really! Listen - if you wrote a petition to God right now, what would it say?"
I thought for a while, then pulled out a notebook and wrote this petition:
Dear God.
Please intervene and help end this divorce. My husband and I have failed at our marriage and now we are failing at our divorce. This poisonous process is bringing suffering to us and to everyone who cares about us.
I recognize that you are busy with wars and tragedies and much larger conflicts than the ongoing dispute of one dysfunctional couple. But it is my understanding that the health of the planet is affected by the health of every individual on it. As long as even two souls are locked in conflict, the whole of the world is contaminated by it. Similarly, if even one or two souls can be free from discord, this will increase the general health of the whole world, the way a few healthy cells in a body can increase the general health of that body.
It is my most humble request, then, that you help us end this conflict, so that two more people can have the chance to become free and healthy, and so there will be just a little bit less bitterness in a world that is already far too troubled by suffering.
I thank you for your kind attention.
Respectfully,
Elizabeth M. Gilbert
I read it to Iva, and she nodded her approval.
"I would sign that," she said.
I handed the petition over to her with a pen, but she was too busy driving, so she said, "No, let's say that I did just sign it. I signed it in my heart."
"Thank you, Iva. I appreciate your support."
"Now, who else would sign it?" she asked.
"My family. My mother and father. My sister."
"OK," she said. "They just did. Consider their names added. I actually felt them sign it. They're on the list now. OK - who else would sign it? Start naming names."
So I started naming names of all the people who I thought would sign this petition. I named all my close friends, then some family members and some people I worked with. After each name, Iva would say with assurance, "Yep. He just signed it," or "She just signed it." Sometimes Iva added something like: "My parents just signed it. They raised their children during a war. They hate useless conflict. They'd be happy to see your divorce end."
I closed my eyes and waited for more names to come to me.
"I think Bill and Hillary Clinton just signed it," I said.
"I don't doubt it," she said. "Listen, Liz - anybody can sign this petition. Do you understand that? Call on anyone, living or dead, and start collecting signatures."
"Saint Francis of Assisi just signed it!"
"Of course he did!" Iva smacked her hand against the steering wheel with certainty.
Now I was adding names:
"Abraham Lincoln just signed it! And Gandhi, and Mandela and all the peacemakers. Eleanor Roosevelt, Mother Teresa, Jimmy Carter, Muhammad Ali and the Dalai Lama... and my grandmother who died in 1984 and my grandmother who's still alive... and my Italian teacher, and my therapist, and my agent... and Martin Luther King Jr.... and Martin Scorsese (which you wouldn't necessarily expect, but it's still nice of him)... and my Guru, of course... and Ms. Carpenter, my fourth-grade teacher - "
The names spilled from me. They didn't stop spilling for almost an hour, as we drove across Kansas and my petition for peace stretched into page after invisible page of supporters. Iva kept confirming - yes, he signed it, yes, she signed it - and I became filled with a grand sense of protection, surrounded by the collective goodwill of so many mighty souls.
The list finally wound down, and my anxiety wound down with it. I was sleepy. Iva said, "Take a nap. I'll drive." I closed my eyes. One last name appeared. "Michael J. Fox just signed it," I murmured, then drifted into sleep. I don't know how long I slept, maybe only for ten minutes, but it was deep. When I woke up, Iva was still driving. She was singing a little song to herself. I yawned.
My cell phone rang.
I picked up the phone, whispered hello.
"Great news!" my lawyer announced from distant New York City. "He just signed it!"
A few weeks later, I am living in Italy.
I have quit my job, paid off my divorce settlement and legal bills, given up my house, given up my apartment, put my belongings into storage in my sister's place and packed up two suitcases. My year of traveling has started. And I can actually afford to do this because of a miracle: in advance, my publisher has purchased the book I should write about my travels. It all turned out, in other words, just as the Indonesian medicine man had predicted. I would lose all my money and it would be replaced immediately - or at least enough of it to buy me a year of life.
So now I am a resident of Rome. The apartment I've found is a quiet studio in a historic building, located near the Piazza del Popolo, where the ancient Romans used to race their chariots.
That's good.
The first meal I ate in Rome was nothing much. Just some homemade pasta (spaghetti carbonara) with spinach and garlic. Also, I had one artichoke, just to try it; the Romans are awfully proud of their artichokes. After the spaghetti, I tried the veal. Oh, and also I drank a bottle of house red wine, just for me. And ate some warm bread, with olive oil and salt. Tiramisu for dessert.
I came home after that meal at around 11:00 PM. I climbed the stairs to my apartment, lay down in my new bed and turned off the light. I waited to start crying or worrying, since that's what usually happened to me with the lights off, but I actually felt OK. I felt fine. I felt the early symptoms of contentment.
My weary body asked my weary mind: "Was this all you needed, then?"
There was no response. I was already fast asleep.
It is early September, 2003. The weather is warm and lazy. By this, my fourth day in Rome, I have still not been to a museum, nor have I even looked at a guidebook. But I have been walking endlessly and aimlessly, and I finally found a little place that a friendly bus driver informed me sells The Best Gelato in Rome. I tried a combination of the honey and the hazelnut ice cream. I came back later that same day for the grapefruit and the melon. Then, after dinner that same night, I walked all the way back over there one last time, just to sample a cup of the cinnamon-ginger.
I've been trying to read through one newspaper article every day, no matter how long it takes. I look up approximately every third word in my dictionary. It's also important to read the newspaper every day to see how the pope is doing. Here in Rome, the pope's health is recorded daily in the newspaper, very much like weather, or the TV schedule. Today the pope is tired. Yesterday, the pope was less tired than he is today. Tomorrow, we expect that the pope will not be quite as tired as he was today.
It's kind of a fairyland of language for me here. I went to a bookstore yesterday morning and felt I'd entered an enchanted palace. Everything was in Italian. I found some works by American poets in that bookstore, with the original English version printed on one side of the page and the Italian translation on the other. I bought a volume by Robert Lowell, another by Louise Gluck.
Today I found a library. This library is a beautiful old thing, and within it there is a courtyard garden. The garden is a perfect square, dotted with orange trees and, in the center, a fountain. I sat down on a bench under an orange tree and opened one of the poetry books I'd purchased yesterday. Louise Gluck. I read the first poem in Italian, then in English, and stopped suddenly at this line:
Dal centro della mia vita venne una grande fontana...
"From the center of my life, there came a great fountain..."
I set the book down in my lap, shaking with relief.
Traveling is the great true love of my life. I have always felt, ever since I was sixteen years old and first went to Russia with my saved-up babysitting money, that to travel is worth any cost or sacrifice. I am loyal and constant in my love for travel, as I have not always been loyal and constant in my other loves. I feel about travel the way a happy new mother feels about her impossible, restless newborn baby - I just don't care what it puts me through. Because I adore it. Because it's mine.
I have my own set of survival techniques. I am patient. I know how to pack light. I'm a fearless eater. But my one mighty travel talent is that I can make friends with anybody. People asked me before I left for Italy, "Do you have friends in Rome?" and I said, "No," thinking to myself, "But I will."
There is the grand old system of the "letter of introduction" (today more likely to be an e-mail), presenting you formally to the acquaintance of an acquaintance. This is a great way to meet people. So before I left for Italy, I asked everyone I knew in America if they had any friends in Rome, and I'm happy to report that I have been sent abroad with a substantial list of Italian contacts.
Among all the nominees on my Potential New Italian Friends List, I am most intrigued to meet a fellow named... Luca Spaghetti. Luca Spaghetti is a good friend of my college friend. And that is honestly his name, I'm not making it up. It's too crazy.
Anyhow, I plan to get in touch with Luca Spaghetti just as soon as possible.
First, though, I must get settled into school. My classes begin today at the Leonardo da Vinci Academy of Language Studies, where I will be studying Italian five days a week, four hours a day. I'm so excited about school.
We all have to take a test on the first day, in order to be placed in the proper level of Italian class for our abilities. When I hear this, I immediately start hoping I don't place into a Level One class, because that would be shameful, considering that I already took a whole entire semester of Italian in New York, and that I spent the summer memorizing words, and that I've already been in Rome a week. The thing is, I don't even know how many levels this school has, but as soon as I heard the word level, I decided that I must test into Level Two - at least.
So I come to school early and I take the test. It's such a hard test! I know so much Italian, I know dozens of words in Italian, but they don't ask me anything that I know. Then there's an oral exam, which is even worse. There's this skinny Italian teacher interviewing me and speaking too fast, in my opinion, and I'm nervous and making mistakes with stuff I already know.
In the end, it's OK, though. The skinny Italian teacher looks over my exam and selects my class level: Level TWO!
Classes begin in the afternoon. So after lunch I walk proudly past all those Level One students and enter my first class. It turns out, though, that Level Two is really impossibly hard. I feel like I'm swimming, but barely. The teacher is speaking too fast, skipping over whole chapters of the textbook, saying, "You already know this, you already know that..." and keeping up a rapid conversation with my apparently fluent classmates. Just as soon as the break comes, I run out of that classroom and hurry to the administrative office almost in tears, where I beg in very clear English if they could please move me down to a Level One class. And so they do. And now I am here.
This teacher speaks slowly. This is much better.
The interesting thing about my Italian class is that nobody really needs to be there. There are twelve of us studying together, of all ages, from all over the world, and everybody has come to Rome for the same reason - to study Italian just because they feel like it. Not one of us can identify a single practical reason for being here. Everybody, even the anxious German engineer, shares what I thought was my own personal motive: we all want to speak Italian because we love the way it makes us feel. A sad-faced Russian woman tells us she's treating herself to Italian lessons because "I think I deserve something beautiful." The German engineer says, "I want Italian because I love the dolce vita" - the sweet life.
As I will find out over the next few months, there are actually some good reasons that Italian is the most seductively beautiful language in the world, and why I'm not the only person who thinks so.
In the sixteenth century, some Italian intellectuals got together, chose the most beautiful of all the local dialects and crowned it Italian.
In order to find the most beautiful dialect ever spoken in Italy, they had to reach back in time two hundred years to fourteenth-century Florence. They decided that the proper Italian was the personal language of the great Florentine poet Dante Alighieri.
The Italian we speak today is Dantean. No other European language has such an artistic history. And perhaps no language was ever more perfectly designed to express human emotions than this fourteenth-century Florentine Italian.
The last line of the Divine Comedy, in which Dante is faced with the vision of God Himself, is a sentiment that is still easily understandable by anyone familiar with so-called modem Italian. Dante writes that God is not merely a blinding vision of glorious light, but that He is, most of all, l'amor che move il sole e l'altre stelle...
"The love that moves the sun and the other stars."
So it's really no wonder that I want so desperately to learn this language.
Depression and Loneliness track me down after about ten days in Italy. I am walking through the Villa Borghese one evening after a happy day spent in school, and the sun is setting gold over St. Peter's Basilica. I am feeling contented in this romantic scene, even if I am all by myself, while everyone else in the park is either kissing a lover or playing with a laughing child. But I stop to watch the sunset, and I get to thinking a little too much, and then my thinking turns to brooding, and that's when they catch up with me.
They come upon me all silent and threatening like Pinkerton Detectives, and they flank me - Depression on my left, Loneliness on my right.
I say to them, "How did you find me here? Who told you I had come to Rome?"
Depression, always the wise guy, says, "What - you're not happy to see us?"
"Go away," I tell him.
Loneliness, the more sensitive cop, says, "I'm sorry, ma'am. But I have to accompany you the whole time you're traveling. It's my assignment." I walk back home, hoping to shake them, but they keep following me, these two goons. I don't want to let them up the stairs to my apartment, but I know Depression, and he's got a stick, so there's no stopping him from coming in if he decides that he wants to.
"It's not fair for you to come here," I tell Depression.
But he just gives me that dark smile, settles into my favorite chair, puts his feet on my table and lights a cigar, filling the place with his awful smoke. Loneliness watches and sighs, then climbs into my bed, fully dressed. He's going to make me sleep with him again tonight, I just know it.
I'd stopped taking my medication only a few days earlier. It had just seemed crazy to be taking antidepressants in Italy. How could I be depressed here?
I'd never wanted to be on the medication in the first place. I'd fought taking it for so long, mainly because of a long list of personal objections (e.g.: Americans are overmedicated; we don't know the long-term effects of this stuff yet on the human brain; it's a crime that even American children are on antidepressants these days; we are treating the symptoms and not the causes of a national mental health emergency...). Still, during the last few years of my life, it was clear that I was in trouble. As my marriage dissolved and my drama with David evolved, I'd come to have all the symptoms of a major depression - loss of sleep and appetite, uncontrollable weeping, chronic backaches and stomachaches, despair, inability to concentrate on work... it went on and on.
I took on my depression like it was the fight of my life, which, of course, it was. I became a student of my own depressed experience, trying to find its causes. What was the root of all this despair? Was it psychological? Was it just temporal, a "bad time" in my life? (When the divorce ends, will the depression end with it?) Was it genetic? Was it cultural? Was it astrological? Was it karmic? Was it hormonal? Dietary? Philosophical? Seasonal? Environmental? Did I have a chemical imbalance?
What a large number of factors constitute a single human being! How very many layers we operate on, and how very many influences we receive from our minds, our bodies, our histories, our families, our cities, our souls and our lunches! So I faced the fight at every level. I bought all those self-help books. I prayed liked a novice nun. I stopped eating meat (for a short time, anyway) after someone told me that I was "eating the fear of the animal at the moment of its death." I exercised. I carefully protected myself from sad movies, books and songs. I tried so hard to fight the endless sobbing.
The last thing I tried, after about two years of fighting this sorrow, was medication. If I may impose my opinions here, I think it should always be the last thing you try. For me, the decision happened after a night when I'd sat on the floor of my bedroom for many hours, trying very hard to talk myself out of cutting into my arm with a kitchen knife. I had some other good ideas around that time - about how jumping off a building or blowing my brains out with a gun might stop the suffering. But something about spending a night with a knife in my hand did it.
The next morning I called my friend Susan, begged her to help me. Susan made the phone calls and found me a psychiatrist who would give me a consultation that very day, to discuss the possibility of prescribing antidepressants. I listened to Susan's conversation with the doctor, listened to her say, "I'm afraid my friend is going to seriously hurt herself." I was afraid, too.
When I went to see the psychiatrist that afternoon, he asked me what had taken me so long to get help. I told him my objections and reservations about antidepressants. I laid copies of the three books I'd already published on his desk, and I said, "I'm a writer. Please don't do anything to harm my brain." He said, "If you had a kidney disease, you wouldn't hesitate to take medication for it - why are you hesitating with this?" But, see, that only shows how ignorant he was about my family; we're a family who regard any sickness as a sign of personal, ethical, moral failure.
He put me on a few different drugs until we found the best combination. Quickly, in less than a week, I could feel an extra inch of daylight opening in my mind. Also, I could finally sleep. And this was the real gift, because when you cannot sleep, you cannot get yourself out of the ditch - there's not a chance. The pills gave me those recovery night hours back, and also stopped my hands from shaking and released the panic alert button from inside my heart.
Still, I never relaxed into taking those drugs, though they helped immediately. I always felt conflicted about it. Those drugs were part of my bridge to the other side, there's no question about it, but I wanted to be off them as soon as possible. I'd started taking the medication in January of 2003. By May, I was already diminishing my dosage significantly. Those had been the toughest months, anyhow - the last months of the divorce, the last months with David.
I know these drugs made my misery feel less catastrophic. So I'm grateful for that. But I'm still deeply ambivalent about mood-altering medications. Medicating the symptom of any illness without exploring its root cause is just a classically crazy Western way to think that anyone could ever get truly better. Though one doctor suggested that I might have to go on and off antidepressants many times in my life because of my "tendency toward melancholy," I hope he's wrong. I intend to do everything I can to prove him wrong, or at least to fight that melancholic tendency. Whether this makes me self-defeatingly stubborn, or self-preservingly stubborn, I cannot say.
I am in Rome, and I am in trouble. The goons of Depression and Loneliness have come into my life again. There are more pills in my bottom drawer, but I don't want them. I want to be free of them forever. But I don't want Depression or Loneliness around, either, so I don't know what to do, and I'm spiraling in panic, like I always spiral when I don't know what to do. So what I do for tonight is reach for my most private notebook, which I keep next to my bed in case I'm ever in emergency trouble. I open it up. I find the first blank page. I write:
"I need your help."
Then I wait. After a little while, a response comes, in my own handwriting:
"I'm right here. What can I do for you?"
Here, in this most private notebook, is where I talk to myself. I talk to that same voice I met that night on my bathroom floor when I first prayed to God in tears for help, when something (or somebody) had said, "Go back to bed, Liz." In the years since then, I've found that voice again in times of distress, and have learned that the best way for me to reach it is written conversation. I've been surprised to find that I can almost always access that voice. Even during the worst of suffering, that calm, compassionate, affectionate and infinitely wise voice (who is maybe me, or maybe not exactly me) is always available for a conversation on paper at any time of day or night.
So tonight I reach for that voice again. This is the first time I've done this since I came to Italy. What I write in my journal tonight is that I am weak and full of fear. I explain that Depression and Loneliness have shown up, and I'm scared they will never leave. I say that I don't want to take the drugs anymore, but I'm frightened I will have to. I'm terrified that I will never really pull my life together.
In response, somewhere from within me, rises a now-familiar presence. This is what I find myself writing to myself on the page:
I'm here. I love you. I don't care if you need to stay up crying all night long, I will stay with you. If you need the medication again, go ahead and take it - I will love you through that, as well. If you don't need the medication, I will love you, too. There's nothing you can ever do to lose my love. I will protect you until you die, and after your death I will still protect you. I am stronger than Depression and I am braver than Loneliness and nothing will ever exhaust me.
I fall asleep holding my notebook pressed against my chest, open to this most recent assurance. In the morning when I wake up, I can still smell a faint trace of Depression's lingering smoke, but he himself is nowhere to be seen. Somewhere during the night, he got up and left. And his buddy Loneliness, too.
Here's what's strange, though. I haven't been able to do any Yoga since getting to Rome. For years I've had a steady and serious practice, and I even brought my Yoga mat with me. But it just isn't happening here. I mean, when am I going to do my Yoga stretches? Before my Italian breakfast of chocolate pastries and double cappuccino? Or after? The first few days I was here, I readily rolled out my Yoga mat every morning, but found I could only look at it and laugh.
The culture of Rome just doesn't match the culture of Yoga, not as far as I can see. In fact, I've decided that Rome and Yoga don't have anything in common at all. Except for the way they both kind of remind you of the word toga.
I needed to make some friends. So I got busy with it, and now it is October and I have a nice assortment of them. I know two Elizabeths in Rome now, besides myself. Both are American, both are writers. The first Elizabeth is a novelist and the second Elizabeth is a food writer. With an apartment in Rome, a house in Umbria, an Italian husband and a job that requires her to travel around Italy eating food and writing about it for Gourmet, it appears that the second Elizabeth saved a lot of orphans from drowning during a previous lifetime. Unsurprisingly, she knows all the best places to eat in Rome, including a gelateria that serves a frozen rice pudding (and if they don't serve this kind of thing in heaven, then I really don't want to go there). Of course, by now I've also made friends with Giovanni and Dario, my Tandem Language Exchange fantasy twins. I don't very often see Dario, though he spends a lot of his time with Sofie. Sofie is my best friend from my language class, and she's definitely somebody you'd want to spend your time with, too, if you were Dario. Sofie is Swedish and in her late twenties and so cute you could put her on a hook and use her as bait to catch men of all different nationalities and ages. Sofie has just taken a four-month leave of absence from her good job in a Swedish bank only because she wanted to come to Rome and learn how to speak beautiful Italian. Every day after class, Sofie and I go sit by the Tiber, eating our gelato and studying with each other.
I've also become friends with a cool couple named Maria and Giulio, introduced to me by my friend Ann - an American painter who lived in Rome a few years back. Maria is from America, Giulio's from the south of Italy. He's a filmmaker, she works for an international agricultural policy organization. He doesn't speak great English, but she speaks fluent Italian (and also fluent French and Chinese, so that's not intimidating). Giulio wants to learn English, and asked if he could practice conversing with me in another Tandem Exchange. In case you're wondering why he couldn't just study English with his American-born wife, it's because they're married and they fight too much whenever one tries to teach anything to the other one. So Giulio and I now meet for lunch twice a week to practice our Italian and English; a good task for two people who don't have any history of irritating each other.
But my newest best friend in Italy is, of course, Luca Spaghetti. Even in Italy, by the way, it's considered a very funny thing to have a last name like Spaghetti. Luca speaks perfect English and is a good eater, so he's terrific company for me. He often calls in the middle of the day to say, "Hey, I'm in your neighborhood - want to meet up for a quick cup of coffee?"
Luca is a tax accountant. An Italian tax accountant, which means that he is, in his own description, "an artist," because there are several hundred tax laws in Italy and all of them contradict each other.
Luca has traveled a lot, though he claims he could never live anywhere but in Rome, near his mother, since he is an Italian man, after all - what can he say? But it's not just his mamma who keeps him around. He's in his early thirties, and has had the same girlfriend since he was a teenager. All his friends are the same friends he's had since childhood, and all from the same neighborhood. They watch the soccer matches together every Sunday - either at the stadium or in a bar (if the Roman teams are playing away) - and then they all return separately to the homes where they grew up, in order to eat the big Sunday afternoon meals cooked by their mothers and grandmothers.
I wouldn't move from Rome, either, if I were Luca Spaghetti.
Sometimes I wonder what I'm doing here, I admit it.
While I have come to Italy in order to experience pleasure, during the first few weeks I was here, I felt a bit of panic as to how I should do that. Frankly, pure pleasure is not my cultural model. I come from a long line of super hard-working people. My mother's family were Swedish immigrant farmers. My father's side of the family were English Puritans.
Generally speaking, though, Americans have an inability to relax into sheer pleasure. Ours is an entertainment-seeking nation, but not necessarily a pleasure-seeking one. Americans work harder and longer and more stressful hours than anyone in the world today. But as Luca Spaghetti pointed out, we seem to like it. Many Americans feel happier and more fulfilled in their offices than they do in their own homes. Americans don't really know how to do nothing. This is the cause of that great sad American stereotype - the overstressed executive who goes on vacation, but who cannot relax.
I once asked Luca Spaghetti if Italians on vacation have that same problem. He laughed so hard he almost drove his motorbike into a fountain.
"Oh, no!" he said. "We are the masters of il bel far niente."
This is a sweet expression. Il bel far niente means "the beauty of doing nothing." Now listen - Italians have traditionally always been hard workers. But even against that hard work, il bel far niente has always been a cherished Italian ideal. The beauty of doing nothing is the goal of all your work, the final accomplishment for which you are most highly congratulated. The more exquisitely and delightfully you can do nothing, the higher your life's achievement. You don't necessarily need to be rich in order to experience this, either. Anyone with a talent for happiness can do this, not only the rich.
For me, though, a major obstacle in my pursuit of pleasure was my ingrained sense of Puritan guilt. Do I really deserve this pleasure? This is very American, too - the insecurity about whether we have earned our happiness. Planet Advertising in America orbits completely around the need to convince the uncertain consumer that yes, you have actually warranted a special treat. You Deserve a Break Today! Because You're Worth It! You've Come a Long Way, Baby! And the insecure consumer thinks, Yeah! Thanks! Such advertising campaigns would probably not be as effective in the Italian culture, where people already know that they are entitled to enjoyment in this life.
Which is probably why, when I told my Italian friends that I'd come to their country in order to experience four months of pure pleasure, they didn't reproach me. Nobody once said, "How completely irresponsible of you." But while the Italians have given me full permission to enjoy myself, I still can't quite let go. During my first few weeks in Italy, I was looking for a task. I wanted to take on pleasure like a homework assignment, or a giant science fair project.
When I realized that the only question was, "How do I define pleasure?" and that I was truly in a country where people would permit me to explore that question freely, everything changed. Everything became... delicious. All I had to do was ask myself every day, for the first time in my life, "What would you enjoy doing today, Liz? What would bring you pleasure right now?" With no obligations to worry about, this question finally became distilled and absolutely self-specific.
It was interesting for me to discover what I did not want to do in Italy. There are so many manifestations of pleasure in Italy, and I didn't have time to sample them all. I was not interested in fashion, or opera, or cinema, or skiing in the Alps. I didn't even want to look at that much art. I am a bit ashamed to admit this, but I did not visit a single museum during my entire four months in Italy. I found that all I really wanted was to eat beautiful food and to speak as much beautiful Italian as possible. Happiness inhabited my every molecule.
Until - as often happened during those first months of travel, whenever I felt such happiness - my guilt alarm went off. I heard my ex-husband's voice speaking in my ear: So this is what you gave up everything for? This is why you threw away our entire life together? For that ice cream and an Italian newspaper?
I replied aloud to him. "First of all," I said, "I'm very sorry, but this isn't your business anymore. And secondly, to answer your question... yes."
One obvious topic still needs to be addressed concerning my whole pursuit of pleasure thing in Italy: What about sex?
To answer that question simply: I don't want to have any while I'm here.
To answer it more thoroughly and honestly - of course, sometimes I desperately want to have some, but I've decided to sit this particular game out for a while. I don't want to get involved with anybody. When I get lonely these days, I think: So be lonely, Liz. Learn your way around loneliness. Make a map of it. Sit with it, for once in your life. Welcome to the human experience. But never again use another person's body or emotions as a scratching post for your own unfulfilled yearnings.
It's a kind of emergency life-saving policy, more than anything else. I got started early in life with the pursuit of sexual and romantic pleasure. I have consistently had a boy or a man (or sometimes both) in my life ever since I was fifteen years old. That's almost two decades I have been entwined in some kind of drama with some kind of guy.
Moreover, I disappear into the person I love. If I love you, you can have everything. You can have my time, my devotion, my body, my money, my family, my dog, my dog's money, my dog's time - everything. If I love you, I will carry for you all your pain, I will assume for you all your debts, I will protect you from your own insecurity, I will project upon you all sorts of good qualities that you have never actually cultivated in yourself and I will buy Christmas presents for your entire family. I will give you all this and more, until I get so exhausted that the only way I can recover my energy is by becoming infatuated with someone else.
I do not speak about these facts about myself with pride, but this is how it's always been.
And there's a final reason I'm hesitant to get involved with someone else. I still happen to be in love with David, and I don't think that's fair to the next guy. I don't even know if David and I are totally broken up yet. I don't know.
So I'm exhausted by the cumulative consequences of a lifetime of hasty choices and chaotic passions. By the time I left for Italy, my body and my spirit were tired. And that's why I've quit.
Yesterday afternoon I went to the soccer game with Luca Spaghetti and his friends. We were there to watch Lazio play. There are two soccer teams in Rome - Lazio and Roma. The rivalry between the teams and their fans is immense, and can divide happy families and peaceful neighborhoods into civil war zones. It's important that you choose early in life whether you are a Lazio fan or a Roma fan, because this will determine, to a large part, who you keep out with every Sunday afternoon for the rest of time. Luca has a group of about ten close friends who all love each other like brothers. Except that half of them are Lazio fans and half of them are Roma fans. They can't really help it; they were all born into families where the loyalty was already established.
"We can change our wives," he said. "We can change our jobs, our nationalities and even our religions, but we can never change our team."
By the way, the word for "fan" in Italian is tifoso. Derived from the word for typhus. In other words - one who is mightily fevered.
The Lazio players were no less dramatic than their fans, rolling on the ground in pain, then jumping up on their feet two seconds later to lead another attack on the goal.
Lazio lost, though.
Needing to be cheered up after the game, Luca Spaghetti asked his friends, "Should we go out?"
I assumed this meant, "Should we go out to a bar?" That's what sports fans in America would do if their team had just lost. They'd go to a bar and get drunk. And not just Americans would do this - so would the English, the Australians, the Germans... everyone, right? But Luca and his friends didn't go out to a bar to cheer themselves up. They went to a bakery. The place was crowded that Sunday night. But it is always crowded after the games. The Lazio fans always stop here on their way home from the stadium to stand in the street for hours, leaning up against their motorcycles, talking about the game, looking macho as anything, and eating cream puffs.
I love Italy.
I am learning about twenty new Italian words a day. I'm always studying, flipping through my index cards while I walk around the city. Where am I getting the brain space to store these words? I'm hoping that maybe my mind has decided to clear out some old negative thoughts and sad memories and replace them with these shiny new words.
My favorite thing to say in all of Italian is a simple, common word:
Attraversiamo.
It means, "Let's cross over." Friends say it to each other constantly when they're walking down the sidewalk and have decided it's time to switch to the other side of the street. The first time Giovanni said it to me, we were walking near the Colosseum. I suddenly heard him speak that beautiful word, and I stopped dead, demanding, "What does that mean? What did you just say?"
"Attraversiamo. "
He couldn't understand why I liked it so much. Let's cross the street? But to my ear, it's the perfect combination of Italian sounds. I love this word. I say it all the time now.
Giovanni's favorite word in English is half-assed.
Luca Spaghetti's is surrender.
I take myself on a six-hour walk through town today. This is easy to do, especially if you stop frequently to have espresso and pastries. I start at my apartment door, then wander through the cosmopolitan shopping center that is my neighborhood.
I pass the Palazzo Borghese, a building that has known many famous tenants. Then I stroll along the banks of the great, swampy Tiber, all the way down to the Tiber Island, which is one of my favorite quiet places in Rome.
I cross over the river to Trastevere - the neighborhood that claims to be inhabited by the truest Romans, the workers, the guys who have, over the centuries, built all the monuments on the other side of the Tiber. I have lunch in a quiet trattoria here, and I eat my food and drink wine slowly and with great pleasure.
Then I go have a look at the Pantheon. I try to look at the Pantheon every chance I get, since I am here in Rome after all, and an old proverb says that anyone who goes to Rome without seeing the Pantheon "goes and comes back an ass."
On my way back home I stop at the address in Rome I find most strangely affecting - the Augusteum.
Augustus's mausoleum fell to ruins and thieves during the Dark Ages. By the twelfth century, though, the monument had been renovated into a fortress for the powerful Colonna family, to protect them from various warring princes. Then the Augusteum was transformed somehow into a vineyard, then a Renaissance garden, then a bullring, then a fireworks depository, then a concert hall. In the 1930s, Mussolini seized the property and restored it, so that it could someday be the final resting place for his remains. But it never happened. Today the Augusteum is one of the quietest and loneliest places in Rome, buried deep in the ground. The city has grown up around it over the centuries.
I find the endurance of the Augusteum so reassuring, that this structure has had such an unpredictable career, yet always adjusted to the particular wildness of the times. To me, the Augusteum is like a person who's led a totally crazy life.
I look at the Augusteum, and I think that perhaps my life has not actually been so chaotic, after all. It is merely this world that is chaotic, bringing changes to us all that nobody could have anticipated. The Augusteum warns me not to get attached to any ideas about who I am, what I represent, whom I belong to, or what function I may once have intended to serve. Yesterday I might have been a glorious monument to somebody, true enough - but tomorrow I could be a fireworks depository. Even in the Eternal City, says the silent Augusteum, one must always be prepared for endless waves of transformation.
I had shipped ahead a box of books to myself, right before I left New York to move to Italy. The box was guaranteed to arrive at my Roman apartment within four to six days, but two months have passed now, and I have seen no sign of my box. My Italian friends tell me to put the box out of my mind completely. They say that the box may arrive or it may not arrive, but such things are out of our hands.
The mystery of my missing box started a long discussion one night between me, my American friend Maria and her husband, Giulio. Maria thinks that in a civilized society one should be able to rely on such things as the post office delivering one's mail at the appointed time, but Giulio argues. He submits that the post office belongs not to man, but to the fates, and that delivery of mail is not something anybody can guarantee. Maria, annoyed, says this is only further evidence of the Protestant-Catholic divide. This divide is best proven, she says, by the fact that Italians - including her own husband - can never make plans for the future, not even a week in advance. If you ask a Protestant from the American Midwest to commit to a dinner date next week, that Protestant, believing that she is the captain of her own destiny, will say, "Thursday night is fine for me." But if you ask a Catholic from Calabria to make the same commitment, he will only shrug, turn his eyes to God, and ask, "How can any of us know whether we will be free for dinner next Thursday night, given that everything is in God's hands and none of us can know our fate?"
I called my friend Sofie and said, "Let's go down to Naples for the day and eat some pizza!"
Immediately, just a few hours later, we are on the train, and then - like magic - we are there. I instantly love Naples. Wild, noisy, dirty Naples. The city is all decorated with the laundry that hangs from every window and dangles across every street; everybody's fresh-washed undershirts and brassieres flapping in the wind like flags.
The people here are so insanely proud to be from Naples, and why shouldn't they be? This is a city that gave the world pizza and ice cream. They still have their own dialect here, and an ever-changing local slang, but somehow I find that the Neapolitans are the easiest people for me to understand in Italy. Why? Because they want you to understand. They talk loud and emphatically, and if you can't understand what they're actually saying out of their mouths, you can usually pick up the meaning from the gesture.
Giovanni and Dario, my Tandem Exchange twins, are originally from Naples. Before I left Rome Giovanni gave me the name of a pizzeria in Naples that I had to try, because, Giovanni informed me, it sold the best pizza in Naples. I found this a wildly exciting prospect, considering that the best pizza in Italy is from Naples, and the best pizza in the world is from Italy, which means that this pizzeria must offer... the best pizza in the world?
So Sofie and I have come to Pizzeria da Michele, and these pies we have just ordered - one for each of us - are making us lose our minds.
Then Sofie and I order another pie - another whole pizza each.
A word about my body. I am gaining weight every day, of course. I am doing rude things to my body here in Italy, taking in such terrible amounts of cheese and pasta and bread and wine and chocolate. But my body is so patient. It says, "OK, kid, live it up, I recognize that this is just temporary. Let me know when your little experiment with pure pleasure is over, and I'll see what I can do about damage control."
Still, when I look at myself in the mirror of the best pizzeria in Naples, I see a bright-eyed, clear-skinned, happy and healthy face. I haven't seen a face like that on me for a long time.
"Thank you," I whisper. Then Sofie and I run out in the rain to look for pastries.
It is this happiness, I suppose (which is really a few months old by now), that gets me to thinking upon my return to Rome that I need to do something about David. That maybe it's time for us to end our story forever. We were already separated, that was official, but there was still a window of hope left open that perhaps someday we could give things another try. We loved each other. That was never the question. It's just that we couldn't figure out how to stop making each other desperately miserable.
So many times I had wished with David that I could behave more like my mother does in her marriage - independent, strong, self-sufficient. What I grew up watching in my household was a mother who would receive her husband's love and affection whenever he thought to offer it, but would then step aside and take care of herself whenever he drifted off into his own peculiar universe. This is how it looked to me.
But then I'd had a conversation with my mother, not long before I'd left for Rome. She'd come into New York to have one last lunch with me, and she'd asked me frankly what had happened between me and David. I told her. I told her everything. I told her how much I loved David, but how lonely and heartsick it made me to be with this person who was always disappearing from the room, from the bed, from the planet.
"He sounds like your father," she said. A brave and generous admission.
"The problem is," I said, "I'm not like my mother. I'm not as tough as you, Mom. There's a constant level of closeness that I really need from the person I love. I wish I could be more like you, then I could have this love story with David. But it just destroys me to not be able to count on that affection when I need it."
Then my mother shocked me. She said, "All those things that you want from your relationship, Liz? I have always wanted those things, too."
In that moment, it was as if my strong mother reached across the table, opened her fist and finally showed me the handful of bullets she'd had to bite over the decades in order to stay happily married (and she is happily married) to my father. I had never seen this side of her before, not ever. Seeing all this, I could feel my worldview start to make a radical shift.
If even she wants what I want, then...?
Then my mother said, "You have to understand how little I was raised to expect that I deserved in life, honey. Remember - I come from a different time and place than you do."
I closed my eyes and saw my mother, ten years old on the family farm in Minnesota, working like a hired hand, raising her younger brothers, wearing the clothes of her older sister, wishing to get herself out of there...
"And you have to understand how much I love your father," she concluded.
My mother has made choices in her life, as we all must, and she is at peace with them. I can see her peace. Maybe some things were sacrificed, and my dad made his sacrifices, too - but who amongst us lives without sacrifice?
And the question now for me is, What are my choices to be? What do I believe that I deserve in this life? Where can I accept sacrifice, and where can I not? It has been so hard for me to imagine living a life without David in it. Even just to imagine that there will never be another road trip with my favorite traveling companion. But how can I accept that bliss when it comes with this dark isolation, corrosive insecurity, sinister resentment? I can't do it anymore. Something about my recent joy in Naples has made me certain that I not only can find happiness without David, but must. No matter how much I love him, I have to say goodbye to this person now.
So I write him an e-mail.
I tell him that I hope he's well, and I report that I am well. I make a few jokes. We always were good with the jokes. Then I explain that I think we need to put an end to this relationship for good. That maybe it's time to admit that it will never happen. The note isn't too dramatic. Lord knows we've had enough drama together already. I keep it short and simple. But there's one more thing I need to add. Holding my breath, I type, "If you want to look for another partner in your life, of course you have nothing but my blessings." My hands are shaking. I sign off with love, trying to keep a cheerful tone.
I feel like I just got hit in the chest with a stick.
My sister's arrival in Rome a few days later helped push my attention away from sadness over David and bring me back up to speed. My sister does everything fast. She's three years older than me and three inches taller than me. She's an athlete and a scholar and a mother and a writer. The whole time she was in Rome, she was training for a marathon, which means she woke up at dawn and ran eighteen miles in the time it generally takes me to read one article in the newspaper and drink two cappuccinos.
My sister's name is Catherine. She's my one and only sibling. When we were growing up in rural Connecticut, it was just the two of us, living in a farmhouse with our parents. No other kids nearby. She was mighty and domineering, the commander of my whole life. I lived in awe and fear of her; nobody else's opinion mattered but hers. We were not always friends. She was annoyed by me, and I was scared of her, I believe, until I was twenty-eight years old and got tired of it. That was the year I finally contradicted her, and her reaction was something like, "Why did you wait so long?"
We were just beginning to have the new terms of our relationship when my marriage went into a skid. Catherine held me up like a champion. She answered the phone in the middle of the night whenever I was in distress and made comforting noises. And she came along with me when I went searching for answers as to why I was so sad.
Now we speak to each other on the phone almost every day - or at least we did, before I moved to Rome. Before either of us gets on an airplane now, the one always calls the other and says, "I know this is gloomy, but I just wanted to tell you that I love you. You know... just in case..." And the other one always says, "I know... just in case."
She arrives in Rome prepared, as ever. She brings five guidebooks, all of which she has read already, and she has the city pre-mapped in her head. She was completely oriented before she even left Philadelphia.
So my sister comes to visit me in Rome - in my new city - and then shows it to me. This is Rome, Catherine-style. Full of facts and dates and architecture that I do not see because my mind does not work in that way. The only thing I ever want to know about any place or any person is the story, this is the only thing I watch for - never for aesthetic details.
Catherine takes me into dozens of churches in Rome, and I confuse them - St. This and St. That... but I love to be inside these places with my sister, whose cobalt eyes miss nothing.
My sister's faith is in learning. Her sacred text is the Oxford English Dictionary. As she bows her head in study, she is with her God. I see my sister in prayer again later that same day - when she drops to her knees in the middle of the Roman Forum, clears away some litter off the soil, then takes up a small stone and draws for me in the dirt a plan of a classic Romanesque basilica. She points from her drawing to the ruin before her, leading me to understand what that building looked like eighteen centuries earlier.
In Italian there is a seldom-used tense called the passato remoto, the remote past. You use this tense when you are discussing things in the far, far distant past, for example, ancient history. But my sister, if she spoke Italian, would not use this tense to discuss ancient history. In her world, the Roman Forum is not remote, it is not past. It is exactly as present and close to her as I am.
She leaves the next day.
"Listen," I say, "be sure to call me when your plane lands safely, OK? Not to be gloomy, but..."
"I know, sweetie," she says. "I love you, too."
I am so surprised sometimes to notice that my sister is a wife and a mother, and I am not. Somehow I always thought it would be the opposite. I thought it would be me who would end up with a houseful of muddy boots and crying kids, while Catherine would be living by herself, reading alone at night in her bed. We grew up into different adults. It's better this way, though, I think. Against all predictions, we've each created lives that agree with us. Her solitary nature means she needs a family to keep her from loneliness; my gregarious nature means I will never have to worry about being alone, even when I am single. I'm happy that she's going back home to her family and also happy that I have another nine months of traveling ahead of me, where all I have to do is eat and read and pray and write.
I still can't say whether I will ever want children. I was so astonished to find that I did not want them at thirty. I can only say how I feel now - grateful to be on my own. I also know that I won't have children just in case I might regret missing it later in life; I don't think this is a strong enough motivation to bring more babies onto the earth. Though I suppose people reproduce sometimes for that reason - for insurance against later regret.
I'm lucky that at least I have my writing. This is something people can understand. Ah, she left her marriage in order to preserve her art. That's sort of true, though not completely so. A lot of writers have families. Toni Morrison, just to name an example, didn't let the raising of her son stop her from winning the Nobel Prize. But Toni Morrison made her own path, and I must make mine. The Bhagavad Gita - that ancient Indian Yogic text - says that it is better to live your own destiny imperfectly than to live an imitation of somebody else's life with perfection. So now I have started living my own life.
Anyway, I say that only to admit - in comparison to my sister's existence, to her home and to her good marriage and to her children - I'm looking pretty unstable these days. I don't even have an address, and that's kind of a crime against normality at this old age of thirty-four.
Over the next six weeks, I travel to Bologna, to Florence, to Venice, to Sicily, to Sardinia, once more down to Naples, then over to Calabria. These are short trips, mostly - a week here, a weekend there - just the right amount of time to get the feel for a place, to look around, to ask people on the street where the good food is and then to go eat it. I drop out of my Italian language school, because I felt that it was interfering with my efforts to learn Italian, since it was keeping me stuck in the classroom instead of wandering around Italy, where I could practice the language with people in the street.
These weeks of spontaneous travel are a fantastic time, running to the train station and buying tickets left and right, finally beginning to really enjoy my freedom because it has finally came to me that I can go wherever I want.
I've already got a date in Venice. I'm meeting my friend Linda there.
Linda is coming to Venice from Seattle. She wanted to come see me in Italy, so I invited her to Venice.
I first met Linda in Bali almost two years ago, when I went for that Yoga retreat. Since then, we've done a trip to Costa Rica together, too. She's one of my favorite traveling companions, entertaining and surprisingly organized.
So we find each other there in Venice. Her cheer, her optimism - they in no way match this stinky, slow, sinking, mysterious, silent, weird city. Venice seems like a wonderful city in which to die a slow and alcoholic death, or to lose a loved one. Seeing Venice, I'm grateful that I chose to live in Rome instead. Venice is beautiful, but like a Bergman movie is beautiful; you can admire it, but you don't really want to live in it.
Venice is spooky under its rough November skies. The city creaks and sways like a fishing pier. Despite Linda's initial confidence, we get lost every day, and most especially at night, taking wrong turns toward dark corners that dead-end dangerously and directly into canal water.
Yet I don't get depressed here. I can cope with, and even somehow enjoy, the sinking melancholy of Venice, just for a few days. Somewhere in me I am able to recognize that this is not my melancholy; this is the city's own indigenous melancholy, and I am healthy enough these days to be able to feel the difference between me and it.
Anyhow, it's hard to be depressed with Linda babbling beside me, trying to get me to buy a giant purple fur hat. She is a firefly, this Linda. In Venice in the Middle Ages there was once a profession for a man called a codega - a fellow you hired to walk in front of you at night with a lit lantern, showing you the way, scaring off thieves and demons, bringing you confidence and protection through the dark streets. This is Linda - my temporary Venetian codega.
It's nice to be back. Rome is so awake and alive, so sexy in the sunshine.
I remember something that my friend Maria's husband, Giulio, said to me once. We were sitting in an outdoor cafe, having our conversation practice, and he asked me what I thought of Rome. I told him I really loved the place, of course, but somehow knew it was not my city. There was something about Rome that didn't belong to me, and I couldn't quite figure out what it was.
Giulio said, "Maybe you and Rome just have different words."
"What do you mean?"
He said, "Don't you know that the secret to understanding a city and its people is to learn - what is the word of the street?"
Then he went on to explain, in a mixture of English, Italian and hand gestures, that every city has a single word that defines it, that identifies most people who live there. If you could read people's thoughts as they were passing you on the streets of any given place, you would discover that most of them are thinking the same thought. Whatever that majority thought might be - that is the word of the city. And if your personal word does not match the word of the city, then you don't really belong there.
"What's Rome's word?" I asked.
"SEX," he announced.
"But isn't that a stereotype about Rome?"
"No."
"But surely there are some people in Rome thinking about other things than sex?"
Giulio insisted: "No. All of them, all day, all they are thinking about is SEX."
"Even over at the Vatican?"
"That's different. The Vatican isn't part of Rome. They have a different word over there. Their word is POWER."
"You'd think it would be FAITH."
"It's POWER," he repeated. "Trust me. But the word in Rome - it's SEX." It's a strange theory, impossible to prove, but I like it.
Giulio asked, "What's the word in New York City?"
I thought about this for a moment, then decided. "It's a verb, of course. I think it's ACHIEVE."
"What's the word in Naples?" I asked Giulio. He knows the south of Italy well.
"FIGHT," he decides.
"What's your word?" Giulio asks me then.
Now that, I definitely could not answer.
I don't know the answer, and I suppose that's what this year of journeying is about. Finding my word.
Luca Spaghetti's birthday falls this year on America's Thanksgiving Day, so he wants to do a turkey for his birthday party. He's never eaten a big, fat, roasted American Thanksgiving turkey, though he's seen them in pictures. He says we can use the kitchen of his friends Mario and Simona, who have a nice big house in the mountains outside Rome, and who always host Luca's birthday parties.
So here was Luca's plan for the festivities - he would pick me up at around seven o'clock at night, after he'd finished work, and then we would drive north out of Rome for an hour or so to his friends' house and we'd drink some wine and all get to know each other, and then, probably around 9:00 PM, we would start roasting a twenty-pound turkey...
I had to do some explaining to Luca about how much time it takes to roast a twenty-pound turkey. I told him his birthday feast would probably be ready to eat around dawn the next day. He was destroyed.
My friend Deborah has come to Rome from Philadelphia for the weekend, to celebrate the holiday with me. Deborah's an internationally respected psychologist, a writer and a feminist theorist, but I still think of her as my favorite regular customer, back from the days when I was a diner waitress and she came in for lunch and said clever things to me over the counter. Sofie will be coming to Luca's party, too. Sofie and I have been friends for about fifteen weeks. Everybody is always welcome on Thanksgiving. Especially when it also happens to be Luca Spaghetti's birthday.
We drive out of tired Rome late in the evening, up into the mountains. We arrive at the house of Luca's old friends Mario and Simona, parents of the twin twelve-year-old girls Giulia and Sara. Paolo - a friend of Luca's whom I'd met before at soccer games - is there, too, along with his girlfriend. Of course, Luca's own girlfriend, Giuliana, is there, as well. The fireplace is lit. The olive oil is homemade.
No time to roast a twenty-pound turkey, obviously, so Luca cooks some lovely cuts of turkey breast. Somehow it comes out great. Luca had been worried about how the conversation would proceed tonight, considering that half the guests can't speak English and the other half can't speak Italian (and only Sofie can speak Swedish), but it seems to be one of those miracle evenings where everyone can understand each other perfectly, or at least your neighbor can help translate when the odd word gets lost.
I lose count of how many bottles of Sardinian wine we drink before Deborah introduces to the table the suggestion that we follow a nice American custom here tonight by joining hands and - each in turn - saying what we are most grateful for. In three languages, then, this montage of gratitude comes forth, one testimony at a time. When it comes my turn to speak, I begin "Sono grata..." but then find I cannot say my real thoughts. Namely, that I am so grateful to be free tonight from the depression that had been eating me for a long time. I don't mention any of this because I don't want to alarm the children. Instead, I say a simpler truth - that I am grateful for old and new friends. That I am grateful, most especially tonight, for Luca Spaghetti. That I hope he has a happy thirty-third birthday, and I hope he lives a long life, in order to stand as an example to other men of how to be a generous, loyal and loving human being. While I am saying all this I am crying and each one is crying, too.
Our party doesn't end until almost dawn. Luca Spaghetti drives me and Deborah and Sofie all the way back home. We try to help him stay awake as the sun comes up by singing. Silent night, sainted night, holy night, we sing over and over in every language we know, as we all head back into Rome together.
None of my pants, after almost four months in Italy, fit me anymore. Not even the new clothes I just bought last month (when I'd already outgrown my "Second Month in Italy" pants) fit me anymore. I can't afford to buy a new wardrobe every few weeks, and I am aware that soon I will be in India, where the pounds will just melt away, but still - I cannot walk in these pants anymore. I can't stand it.
I recently stepped on a scale in an Italian hotel and learned that I have gained twenty-three pounds in my four months of Italy. About fifteen pounds of that I actually needed to gain because I had become so skeletal during these last hard years of divorce and depression. The next five pounds, I just gained for fun. As for the final three? Just to prove a point, I suppose.
But so it is that I find myself shopping for an item of clothing I will always keep in my life as a cherished souvenir: "My Last Month in Italy Jeans." The young lady in the shop is nice enough to keep bringing me bigger and bigger sizes, handing them through the curtain one after another without commentary, only asking with concern each time if this is closer to a fit. Several times, I have needed to poke my head out of this curtain and ask, "Excuse me - do you have a pair that is slightly bigger?" Until the nice young lady finally gives me a pair of jeans with a waist measurement that really hurts my eyes to witness. I step out of the dressing room, presenting myself to the salesgirl.
She doesn't blink. She looks at me like an art curator trying to assess the value of a vase. A rather large vase.
"Carina," she decides finally. Cute.
I have only a week left here. I'm planning to go back to America for Christmas before flying to India, not only because I can't stand the thought of spending Christmas without my family but also because the next eight months of my journey - India and Indonesia - require a complete repacking of things. Very little of the stuff you need when you are living in Rome is the same stuff you need when you are wandering around India. And maybe it's in preparation for my trip to India that I decide to spend this last week traveling through Sicily. Or maybe I only want to go to Sicily because of what Goethe said: "Without seeing Sicily one cannot get a clear idea of what Italy is."
When I got to Taormina, I had to find the right person of whom to ask my favorite question in Italian: "Where is the best food in this town?" In Taormina, that person turns out to be a sleepy policeman. He gives me one of the greatest things anyone can ever give me in life - a tiny piece of paper with the name of a restaurant written on it, a hand-drawn map of how to find the place.
There I say that I don't need to see the menu but want to taste the best food possible because this is my first night in Sicily. Within the space of twenty minutes I am busily eating the most amazing meal I've eaten yet in all of Italy. It's pasta, but stuffed with a hot, aromatic puree of seafood, served with vegetables. Followed by the rabbit, stewed in thyme.
But Syracuse, the next day, is even better. I ask a fisherman where I should eat tonight, and I leave our conversation clutching yet another little piece of paper, directing me to a little restaurant with no name, where - as soon as I sit down that night - the waiter brings me airy clouds of ricotta sprinkled with pistachio. This is before I even hear about the house specialty.
"No town can live peacefully, whatever its laws," Plato wrote, "when its citizens... do nothing but feast and drink and tire themselves out in the cares of love."
But is it such a bad thing to live like this for just a little while? Just for a few months of one's life, is it so awful to travel through time with no greater ambition than to find the next lovely meal? Or to learn how to speak a language for no higher purpose than that it pleases your ear to hear it? Or to nap in a garden, in a patch of sunlight, in the middle of the day, right next to your favorite fountain? And then to do it again the next day?
I came to Italy exhausted and thin. I did not know yet what I deserved. I still maybe don't fully know what I deserve. But I know that I have collected myself - through the enjoyment of harmless pleasures - into somebody much more intact. The easiest, most fundamentally human way to say it is that I have put on weight. I exist more now than I did four months ago. I will leave Italy noticeably bigger than when I arrived here. And I will leave with the hope that the expansion of one person - the magnification of one life - is indeed an act of worth in this world. Even if that life, just this one time, happens to be nobody's but my own.
or
36 Tales about
the Pursuit of Devotion
My plane lands in Mumbai around 1:30 AM. It is December 30. I find my luggage, then find the taxi that will take me hours and hours out of the city to the Ashram, located in a remote rural village. I doze on the drive through nighttime India.
We pull up to the front gate of the Ashram at 3:30 AM, right in front of the temple. As I'm getting out of the taxi, a young man in Western clothes and a wool hat steps out of the shadows and introduces himself - he is Arturo, a twenty-four-year-old journalist from Mexico and a devotee of my Guru, and he's here to welcome me. As we're exchanging introductions, I can hear the first familiar sounds of my favorite Sanskrit hymn coming from inside. It's the morning Aarati, the first morning prayer, sung every day at 3:30 AM as the Ashram wakes. I point to the temple, asking Arturo, "May I..?" and he nods. So I pay my taxi driver, leave my backpack behind a tree, slip off my shoes, kneel and touch my forehead to the temple step and then walk inside, joining the small gathering of mostly Indian women who are singing this beautiful hymn.
This is the hymn I call "The Amazing Grace of Sanskrit," filled with devotional longing. I begin to sing the familiar words in Sanskrit, from the simple introduction about the sacred teachings of Yoga to the rising tones of worship ("I adore the cause of the universe... I adore the one whose eyes are the sun, the moon and fire... you are everything to me, O god of gods...") to the last summation of all faith ("This is perfect, that is perfect, if you take the perfect from the perfect, the perfect remains").
The women finish singing. They bow in silence, then move out a side door across a dark courtyard and into a smaller temple, barely lit by one oil lamp and perfumed with incense. I follow them. The room is filled with devotees - Indian and Western - wrapped in woolen shawls against the predawn cold. Everyone is seated in meditation, and I slip in beside them. I sit cross-legged, place my hands on my knees, close my eyes.
I have not meditated in four months. I have not even thought about meditating in four months. I sit there. My breath quiets. I say the mantra to myself once very slowly and deliberately, syllable by syllable.
Om.
Na.
Mah.
Shi.
Va.
Ya.
Om Namah Shivaya.
I honor the divinity that resides within me.
Then I repeat it again. Again. And again. I don't know if I fall asleep or if I drop into some kind of spell or even how much time passes. But when the sun finally comes up that morning in India and everyone opens their eyes and looks around, Italy feels ten thousand miles away from me now.
"Why do we practice Yoga?"
I had a teacher once ask that question during a Yoga class, back in New York.
Yoga, in Sanskrit, can be translated as "union." It originally comes from the root word yuj, which means "to yoke," to attach yourself to a task with a strict discipline. And the task in Yoga is to find union - between mind and body, between the individual and her God, between our thoughts and the source of our thoughts, between teacher and student. The ancients developed physical stretches to loosen up their muscles and minds in order to prepare them for meditation. It is difficult to sit in stillness for many hours, after all, if your hip is aching, keeping you from contemplating your divinity because you are too busy contemplating, "Wow... my hip really aches."
True Yoga doesn't compete with any other religion. You may use your Yoga - your disciplined practices of sacred union - to get closer to Krishna, Jesus, Muhammad, Buddha or Yahweh. During my time at the Ashram, I met devotees who identified themselves as practicing Christians, Jews, Buddhists, Hindus and even Muslims.
The Yogic path is about removing the built-in glitches of the human condition, which I'm going to define here as the heartbreaking inability to sustain contentment. The Yogis say that human discontentment is a simple case of mistaken identity. We're unhappy because we think that we are mere individuals, alone with our fears and flaws and resentments and mortality. We wrongly believe that our limited little egos constitute our whole entire nature. We have failed to recognize our deeper divine character. We don't realize that, somewhere within us all, there does exist a supreme Self who is eternally at peace. That supreme Self is our true identity, universal and divine. Before you realize this truth, say the Yogis, you will always be in despair.
Yoga is the effort to experience one's divinity personally and then to hold on to that experience forever. Yoga is about the dedicated effort to pull your attention away from your endless brooding over the past and your nonstop worrying about the future so that you can seek, instead, a place of eternal presence from which you may regard yourself and your surroundings with poise. Only from that point of even-mindedness will the true nature of the world (and yourself) be revealed to you.
In India it is considered that you need a teacher for your Yoga. The word Guru is composed of two Sanskrit syllables. The first means "darkness," the second means "light." Out of the darkness and into the light. What passes from the master into the disciple is something called mantravirya: "The potency of the enlightened consciousness." You come to your Guru, then, not only to receive lessons, as from any teacher, but to actually receive the Guru's state of grace.
There is a theory that if you yearn sincerely enough for a Guru, you will find one. It was only one month after my first night of desperate prayer on my bathroom floor - a night spent tearfully begging God for answers - that I found mine, when I walked into David's apartment and saw a photograph of this stunning Indian woman. And the first time I saw her, it was as though she looked at me through her photograph and said, "You called for me and now I'm here. So do you want to do this thing, or not?"
Setting aside all nervous jokes, I must always remember what I replied that night: a straightforward and bottomless YES.
This Ashram is not a place you can casually drop by and visit. First of all, it's not really accessible. It's located far away from Mumbai, on a dirt road in a rural river valley near a pretty little village (composed of one street, one temple, a handful of shops and a population of cows who wander about freely, sometimes walking into the tailor's shop and lying down there). The Ashram essentially creates the local economy, and also stands as the town's pride. Outside the walls of the Ashram, it is all dust and poverty. Inside, it's all irrigated gardens, beds of flowers, mango trees, cashew trees, palm trees, magnolias. The buildings are nice, though not extravagant. There's a simple dining hall, cafeteria-style. There's a good library of spiritual writings from the world's religious traditions. There are a few temples for different types of gatherings. There are two meditation "caves" - dark and silent basements with comfortable cushions, open all day and night, to be used only for meditation practice. There's a covered outdoor pavilion, where Yoga classes are held in the morning, and there's a kind of a park with an oval walking path around it, where students can jog for exercise. I'm sleeping in a concrete dormitory.
There are some long-term paid staffers at the Ashram, but most of the work here is done by the students themselves. Some of the local villagers also work here on salary. Other locals are devotees of the Guru and live here as students.
There is one temple in the Ashram that is open to the general public, where many Indians come throughout the day to pay tribute to a statue of the Siddha Yogi (or "perfected master") who established this line of teaching back in the 1920s and who is considered a great saint. But the rest of the Ashram is for students only. It's not a hotel or a tourist location. It's more like a university. You must apply to come here, and in order to be accepted for a residency, you must show that you've been studying this Yoga seriously for a long time. A minimum stay of one month is required. (I've decided to stay here for six weeks, and then to travel around India on my own, exploring other temples, Ashrams and devotional sites.)
The students here are about equally divided between Indians and Westerners (and the Westerners are about evenly divided between Americans and Europeans). Courses are taught in both Hindi and English. On your application, you must write an essay, gather references, and answer questions about your mental and physical health and also about your financial stability. The Guru doesn't want people to use her Ashram as an escape from whatever bedlam they have created in their real lives; this will not benefit anyone. She also has a general policy that if your family and loved ones for some reason deeply object to the idea of your following a Guru and living in an Ashram, then you shouldn't do it, it's not worth it. Just stay home in your normal life and be a good person. There's no reason to make a big dramatic production over this.
The level of this woman's practical sensibilities is always comforting to me.
They want you to come here strong because Ashram life is not easy. Not just physically, with days that begin at 3:00 AM and end at 9:00 PM, but also psychologically. You're going to be spending hours and hours a day in silent meditation and contemplation, with little distraction or relief from the apparatus of your own mind. You will be living in close quarters with strangers, in rural India. There are bugs and snakes and rodents. The weather can be extreme - sometimes torrents of rain for weeks, sometimes 100 degrees in the shade before breakfast. Things can get deeply real around here, very fast.
My Guru always says that only one thing will happen when you come to the Ashram - that you will discover who you really are.
My arrival coincides nicely with the arrival of a new year. I have barely one day to get myself oriented to the Ashram, and then it is already New Year's Eve. After dinner, the small courtyard starts to fill with people. We all sit on the ground - some of us on the cool marble floor and some on grass mats. The Indian women have all dressed as though for a wedding. Their hair is oiled. They are wearing their finest silk saris and gold bracelets. The plan is to chant outside in this courtyard until midnight, until the year changes over.
I'm so tired, but I don't drop my little blue string of song, and I drift into such a state that I think I might be calling God's name in my sleep, or maybe I am only falling down the well shaft of this universe. By 11:30, though, the orchestra has picked up the tempo of the chant and kicked it up into sheer joy. Beautifully dressed women in jingly bracelets are clapping and dancing. The drums are slamming, rhythmic, exciting. As the minutes pass, it feels to me like we are collectively pulling the year 2004 toward us. Like we have roped it with our music, and now we are hauling it across the night sky like it's a massive fishing net, full of all our unknown destinies. And what a heavy net it is, indeed, carrying as it does all the births, deaths, tragedies, wars, love stories, inventions, transformations and calamities that are destined for all of us this coming year. We keep singing and we keep hauling, minute-by-minute, voice after voice, closer and closer. The seconds drop down to midnight and we sing with our biggest effort yet and in this last brave exertion we finally pull the net of the New Year over us, covering both the sky and ourselves with it. God only knows what the year might contain, but now it is here, and we are all beneath it.
This is the first New Year's Eve I can ever remember in my life where I haven't known any of the people I was celebrating with. In all this dancing and singing, there is nobody for me to embrace at midnight. But I wouldn't say that anything about this night has been lonely.
No, I would definitely not say that.
We are all given work here, and it turns out that my work assignment is to scrub the temple floors. So that's where you can find me for several hours a day now - down on my knees on the cold marble with a brush and a bucket.
It's tiring physical labor, but my daily hours of work are considerably easier than my daily hours of meditation. The truth is, I don't think I'm good at meditation. I know I'm out of practice with it, but honestly I was never good at it. I can't seem to get my mind to hold still. I mentioned this once to an Indian monk, and he said, "It's a pity you're the only person in the history of the world who ever had this problem." Then the monk quoted to me from the Bhagavad Gita, the most sacred ancient text of Yoga: "Oh Krishna, the mind is restless, turbulent, strong and unyielding. I consider it as difficult to subdue as the wind."
Meditation is both the anchor and the wings of Yoga. Meditation is the way. There's a difference between meditation and prayer, though both practices seek communion with the divine. I've heard it said that prayer is the act of talking to God, while meditation is the act of listening. When I ask my mind to rest in stillness, it is astonishing how quickly it will turn (1) bored, (2) angry, (3) depressed, (4) anxious or (5) all of the above.
The problem with permanent jumping from one thought to another is that you are never where you are. You are always digging in the past or poking at the future, but you don't rest in this moment. If you're looking for union with the divine, this kind of forward (backward) whirling is a problem. There's a reason they call God a presence - because God is right here, right now. In the present is the only place to find Him, and now is the only time.
But to stay in the present moment requires dedicated one-pointed focus. Different meditation techniques teach one-pointedness in different ways - for instance, by focusing your eyes on a single point of light, or by observing the rise and fall of your breath. My Guru teaches meditation with the help of a mantra, sacred words or syllables to be repeated in a focused manner. Mantra has a dual function. For one thing, it gives the mind something to do. The other purpose of mantra is to transport you to another state, rowboat-like, through the choppy waves of the mind. Whenever your attention gets pulled into a cross-current of thought, just return to the mantra, climb back into the boat and keep going. The great Sanskrit mantras are said to contain unimaginable powers, the ability to row you, if you can stay with one, all the way to the shorelines of divinity.
Among my many, many problems with meditation is that the mantra I have been given - Om Namah Shivaya - doesn't sit comfortably in my head. I love the sound of it and I love the meaning of it, but it does not glide me into meditation. It never has, not in the two years I've been practicing this Yoga. When I try to repeat Om Namah Shivaya in my head, it actually gets stuck in my throat...
The following morning, I arrive right on time for the 4:00 AM meditation session which always starts the day here. We are meant to sit for an hour in silence, but I register the minutes as if they are miles - sixty cruel miles that I have to endure. By mile (minute) fourteen, my nerves have started to go, my knees are breaking down and I'm overcome with irritation. Which is understandable, considering that the conversations between me and my mind during meditation generally go something like this:
Me: OK, we're going to meditate now. Let's draw our attention to our breath and focus on the mantra. Om Namah Shivaya. Om Namah Shiv-
Mind: I can help you out with this, you know!
Me: OK, good, because I need your help. Let's go. Om Namah Shivaya. Om Namah Shi-
Mind: I can help you think of nice meditative images. Like - hey, here's a good one. Imagine you are a temple. A temple on an island! And the island is in the ocean!
Me: Oh, that is a nice image.
Mind: Thanks. I thought of it myself.
Me: But what ocean are we picturing here?
Mind: The Mediterranean. Imagine you're one of those Greek islands, with an old Greek temple on it. No, never mind, that's too touristy. You know what? Forget the ocean. Oceans are too dangerous. Here's a better idea - imagine you're an island in a lake, instead.
Me: Can we meditate now, please? Om Namah Shiv-
Mind: Yes! Definitely! But try not to picture that the lake is covered with... what are those things called -
Me: Jet Skis?
Mind: Yes! Jet Skis! Those things consume so much fuel! They're really bad for the environment.
Me: OK, but let's MEDITATE now, please? Om Namah -
Mind: Right! I definitely want to help you meditate! And that's why we're going to skip the image of an island on a lake or an ocean, because that's obviously not working. So let's imagine that you're an island in... a river! So all the thoughts that float by as you're meditating are just the river's natural currents and you can ignore them because you are an island.
Me: Wait, I thought you said I was a temple.
Mind: That's right, sorry. You're a temple on an island. In fact, you are both the temple and the island.
Me: Am I also the river?
Mind: No, the river is just the thoughts.
Me: Stop! Please stop! YOU'RE MAKING ME CRAZY!!!
Mind (wounded): Sorry. I was only trying to help.
Me: Om Namah Shivaya... Om Namah Shivaya... Om Namah Shivaya...
Here there is a promising eight-second pause in thoughts. But then...
Mind: Are you mad at me now?
...and then with a big gasp, like I am coming up for air, my mind wins, my eyes fly open and I quit. In tears. An Ashram is supposed to be a place where you come to deepen your meditation, but this is a disaster. The pressure is too much for me. I can't do it. But what should I do? Run out of the temple crying after fourteen minutes, every day?
This morning, though, instead of fighting it, I just stopped. I gave up. I let myself lean against the wall behind me. My back hurt, I had no strength, my mind was trembling. And then I said to God, "I'm really sorry, but this is the closest I could get to you today."
My body ached in worthlessness.
"Who is the 'me' when I am conversing with my mind, and who is the 'mind'?" I asked myself. I thought about the persistent thought-processing, soul-devouring machine that is my brain, and wondered how on earth I was ever going to master it.
Dinnertime. I'm sitting alone, trying to eat slowly. My Guru is always encouraging us to practice discipline when it comes to eating. She encourages us to eat in moderation and without desperate gulps, to not extinguish the sacred fires of our bodies by dumping too much food into our digestive tracts too fast. When students come to her complaining that they're having trouble meditating, she always asks how their digestion has been lately. It only stands to reason that you'll have trouble gliding lightly into transcendence when your guts are struggling with a sausage pizza, a pound of fried chicken wings and half a coconut cream pie. Which is why they don't serve that kind of stuff here. The food at the Ashram is vegetarian, light and healthy. But still delicious. Which is why it's difficult for me not to wolf it down like a starving orphan. Plus, meals are served buffet-style, and I can't resist taking a second or third portion when beautiful food is just lying out there in the open, smelling good and costing nothing.
So I'm sitting at the dinner table all by myself, making an effort to restrain my fork, when I see a man walk over with his dinner tray, looking for an open chair. I nod to him that he is welcome to join me. I haven't seen this guy around here yet. He must be a new arrival. The stranger moves with the authority of a border town sheriff. He looks like he's in his fifties, but walks like he's lived a few centuries longer than that. He's got white hair and a white beard and a checkered flannel shirt. Wide shoulders and giant hands that look like they could do some damage, but a totally relaxed face.
He sits down across from me and says, "They got mosquitoes around this place big enough to rape a chicken."
Ladies and Gentlemen, Richard from Texas has arrived.
Among the many jobs that Richard from Texas has held in his life are oil-field worker; truck driver; highway construction worker; used-car salesman; soldier in Vietnam; "commodities broker" (that commodity generally being Mexican narcotics); junkie and alcoholic (if you can call this a profession); then former junkie and alcoholic (a much more respectable profession); radio announcer; and, finally, successful dealer in medical equipment (until his marriage fell apart and he gave the whole business to his ex). Now he renovates old houses in Austin.
Richard from Texas is not a guy who worries about a lot of stuff. His presence at this Ashram becomes my great and amusing sense of security.
Groceries.
That's the nickname Richard has given me. He called me so the first night we met, when he noticed how much I could eat. I tried to defend myself ("I was purposefully eating with discipline and intention!") but the name stuck.
Richard came to this Yoga through an ex-girlfriend, who drove him up from Texas to the Ashram in New York to hear the Guru speak. Richard says, "I thought the Ashram was the weirdest thing I ever saw, and I was wondering where the room was where you have to give them all your money, but that never happened..."
After that experience, which was about ten years ago, Richard found himself praying all the time. His prayer was always the same. He kept begging God, "Please, please, please open my heart." That was all he wanted - an open heart. And he would always finish the prayer for an open heart by asking God, "And please send me a sign when the event has occurred." Now he says, recollecting that time, "Be careful what you pray for, Groceries, because you just might get it." After a few months of praying constantly for an open heart, what do you think Richard got? That's right - emergency open-heart surgery. His chest was literally cracked open, as though God were saying, "How's that for a sign?" So now Richard is always cautious with his prayers, he tells me. "Whenever I pray for anything these days, I always wrap it up by saying, 'Oh, and God? Please be gentle with me, OK?"'
"What should I do about my meditation practice?" I ask Richard one day, as he's watching me scrub the temple floors.
"Why do you have to do anything about it, Groceries?"
"I can't get my mind to sit still."
"Have you ever tried to take a toy away from a child? They don't like that, do they? They start kicking and screaming. The best way to take a toy away from a child is distract the kid, give him something else to play with. Divert his attention. Instead of trying to forcefully take thoughts out of your mind, give your mind something better to play with. Something healthier."
"Like what?"
"Like love, Groceries. Like pure divine love."
After my last conversation with Richard from Texas, I'm trying a new approach this morning. I sit down to meditate and I say to my mind, "Listen - I understand you're a little frightened. But I promise, I'm not trying to destroy you. I'm just trying to give you a place to rest. I love you."
I'm trying a different mantra, too. It's one I've had luck with in the past. It's simple, just two syllables:
Ham-sa.
In Sanskrit it means "I am That."
The Yogis say that Ham-sa is the most natural mantra, the one we are all given by God before birth. It is the sound of our own breath. Ham on the inhale, sa on the exhale. As long as we live, every time we breathe in or out, we are repeating this mantra. I am That. I am divine, I am with God, I am an expression of God, I am not separate, I am not alone, I am not this limited illusion of an individual. I've always found Ham-sa easy and relaxing.
So I'll sit with it here today.
Ham-sa.
I am That.
Thoughts come, but I don't pay much attention to them, other than to say to them in an almost motherly manner, "Oh, I know you jokers... go outside and play now... Mommy's listening to God."
Ham-sa.
I am That.
I fall asleep for a while. (Or maybe not. In meditation, you can never really be sure if what you think is sleep is actually sleep; sometimes it's just another level of consciousness.) When I awake, I can feel this soft blue electrical energy pulsing through my body, in waves. It's a little alarming, but also amazing. I don't know what to do, so I just speak internally to this energy. I say to it, "I believe in you," and it magnifies in response. It's frighteningly powerful now, like a kidnapping of the senses. The pounding blue energy keeps pitching through my body, and I can hear a sort of rhythmic humming sound in my ears, and it's so mighty now that I actually can't deal with it anymore. It scares me so much that I say to it, "I'm not ready yet!" and open my eyes. It all goes away. I'm back in a room again. I look at my watch. I've been here - or somewhere - for almost an hour.
I am panting, literally panting.
To understand what that experience was, what happened in there (by which I mean both "in the meditation cave" and "in me") brings up a topic rather esoteric, the subject of kundalini shakti.
Every religion in the world has had a number of devotees who seek a direct, transcendent experience with God. The interesting thing about these mystics is that, when they describe their experiences, they all end up describing exactly the same occurrence. Generally, their union with God occurs in a meditative state, and is delivered through an energy source that fills the entire body with euphoric, electric light.
In Indian Yogic tradition, kundalini shakti is depicted as a snake who lies coiled at the base of the spine until it is released by a master's touch or by a miracle, and which then ascends up through seven chakras, or wheels, and finally through the head, exploding into union with God. These chakras do not exist in the physical body, say the Yogis, so don't look for them there; they exist only in the subtle body, in the body that the Buddhist teachers are referring to when they encourage their students to pull forth a new self from the physical body the way you pull a sword from its sheath.
In mystical India, as in many shamanistic traditions, kundalini shakti is considered a dangerous force to play around with if you are unsupervised; the inexperienced Yogi could quite literally blow his mind with it. You need a teacher - a Guru - to guide you on this path, and ideally a safe place - an Ashram - from which to practice. It is said to be the Guru's touch (either literally in person, or through a more supernatural encounter, like a dream) which releases the bound kundalini energy from its coil at the base of the spine and allows it to begin journeying upward toward God. This moment of release is called shaktipat, divine initiation, and it is the greatest gift of an enlightened master. After that touch, the student might still labor for years toward enlightenment, but the journey has at least begun. The energy has been freed.
I received shaktipat initiation two years ago, when I met my Guru for the first time, back in New York. To be honest, I felt nothing special afterward.
The next day, though, something interesting really happened. We were all gathered with the Guru once more. She led us into meditation, and in the middle of it all, I fell asleep (or whatever the state was) and had a dream. In this dream, I was on a beach, at the ocean. The waves were massive and terrifying. Suddenly, a man appeared beside me. It was my Guru's own master - a great charismatic Yogi I will refer to here only as "Swamiji" (which is Sanskrit for "beloved monk"). Swamiji had died in 1982. I knew him only from photographs around the Ashram. Even through these photographs - I must admit - I'd always found the guy to be a little too scary, a little too powerful. I'd been avoiding his gaze as it stared down at me from the walls. He seemed overwhelming. He wasn't my kind of Guru. I'd always preferred my lovely, compassionate, feminine living master to this deceased (but still fierce) character.
But now Swamiji was in my dream, standing beside me on the beach in all his power. I was terrified. He pointed to the approaching waves and said strictly, "I want you to figure out a way to stop that from happening." Panicked, I took out a notebook and tried to draw inventions that would stop the ocean waves from advancing. I drew massive seawalls and canals and dams. All my designs were so stupid and pointless, though. I could feel Swamiji watching me, impatient and judgmental. Finally I gave up. None of my inventions were clever or strong enough to keep those waves from breaking.
That's when I heard Swamiji laugh. I looked up at this tiny Indian man in his orange robes, and he was laughing, bent over double in delight, wiping joyful tears from his eyes.
"Tell me, dear one," he said, and he pointed out toward the colossal, powerful, endless, rocking ocean. "Tell me, if you would be so kind - how exactly were you planning on stopping that?"
Two nights in a row now I've had dreams of a snake entering my room. I've been waking up sweating. Even worse, once I am awake, my mind has been betraying me into a state of panic like I haven't felt since the worst of the divorce years.
My thoughts keep flying back to my failed marriage. Worse, I'm again thinking about David. I'm arguing with him in my mind. Plus I can't stop thinking about all our happiness together.
Why is all this stuff coming up again now?
I recognize that everything is coming up. Like vomit it's coming up.
I don't want to disturb my roommates, so I hide in the bathroom. The bathroom, always the bathroom! There I am in a bathroom again, in the middle of the night again, weeping my heart out on the floor in loneliness.
When the crying doesn't stop, I take my notebook and a pen and I sit once more beside the toilet. I open to a blank page and scrawl my now-familiar plea of desperation:
Then a long exhale of relief comes as, in my own handwriting, my own constant friend (who is it?) starts loyally to my own rescue:
"I'm right here. It's OK. I love you. I will never leave you..."
The next morning's meditation is a disaster. Desperate, I beg my mind to step aside and let me find God, but my mind stares at me with steely power and says, "I will never let you pass me by."
I don't want anyone to talk to me. I can't tolerate anyone's face right now. But Richard from Texas eventually finds me at dinner and sits down - brave man - in my black smoke of self-loathing.
"What's up?" he asks, with a toothpick in his mouth, as usual.
"Don't ask," I say, but then I start talking and tell him every bit of it, concluding with, "And worst of all, I can't stop obsessing over David. I thought I was over him, but it's all coming up again."
He says, "Give it another six months, you'll feel better."
"I've already given it twelve months, Richard."
"Then give it six more. Just keep throwing six months at it till it goes away. Stuff like this takes time."
I exhale hotly through my nose, bull-like.
"Groceries," Richard says, "listen to me. Your problem is, you just can't let David go. It's over, Groceries. David's purpose was to shake you up, drive you out of that marriage that you needed to leave, tear apart your ego a little bit, show you your obstacles and addictions, make you so desperate and out of control that you had to transform your life, and then introduce you to your spiritual master. That was his job, and he did great, but now it's over. The problem is, you can't accept that this relationship had a real short life. Drop it."
"But I love him."
"So love him."
"But I miss him."
"So miss him. Send him some love and light every time you think about him, and then drop it. You're just afraid to let go of the last bits of David because then you'll really be alone, and Liz Gilbert is scared to death of what will happen if she's really alone. But here's what you have to understand, Groceries. If you clear out all that space in your mind that you're using right now to obsess about this guy, you'll have a vacuum there, an open spot - a doorway. And guess what the universe will do with that doorway? It will rush in - God will rush in - and fill you with more love than you ever dreamed. So stop using David to block that door. Let it go."
Then I ask Richard, "So how long will it be before all this grieving passes?"
"You want an exact date?"
"Yes."
"Something you can circle on your calendar?"
"Yes."
"Let me tell you something, Groceries - you have got some serious control issues."
My rage at this statement consumes me like lire. Control issues? ME? And then, from right down inside the intensity of my offended outrage comes the truth. The immediate, obvious truth.
He's totally right.
The lire passes out of me, fast as it came.
"You're totally right," I say.
"I know I'm right, baby. Listen, you're a powerful woman and you're used to getting what you want out of life, and you didn't get what you wanted in your last few relationships. Your husband didn't behave the way you wanted him to and David didn't either. Life didn't go your way for once. And nothing makes crazy a control freak more than life not going her way."
"Don't call me a control freak, please."
"You have got control issues, Groceries. Come on. Nobody ever told you this before?"
I admit it. "OK, I think you're probably right. Maybe I really have a problem with control. It's just weird that you noticed. Because I don't think it's that obvious on the surface. I mean - I bet most people can't see my control issues when they first look at me."
Richard from Texas laughs so hard he almost loses his toothpick.
"They can't? Honey - Ray Charles could see your control issues!"
"OK, I think I'm done with this conversation now, thank you."
"You have to learn how to let go, Groceries. Otherwise you're going to make yourself sick. You'll just toss and turn forever at nights, beating on yourself for being such a fiasco in life. What's wrong with me? Why am I such a failure? Let me guess - that's probably what you were doing to yourself again last night."
"All right, Richard, that's enough," I say. "I don't want you walking around inside my head anymore."
"Shut the door, then," says my big Texas Yogi.
When I was nine years old, going on ten, I experienced a true metaphysical crisis. Maybe this seems young for such a thing, but I was always an intelligent child. It all happened over the summer between fourth and fifth grade. I was going to be turning ten years old in July, and there was something about the transition from nine to ten - from single digit to double digits - that shocked me into a genuine existential panic, usually reserved for people turning fifty. I remember thinking that life was passing me by so fast. It seemed like only yesterday I was in kindergarten, and here I was, about to turn ten. Soon I would be a teenager, then middle-aged, then elderly, then dead. And everyone else was aging in hyperspeed, too. Everybody was going to be dead soon. My parents would die. My friends would die. My cat would die. What was the point of all this?
This panic I was feeling at age ten was nothing less than a spontaneous realization of mortality's inevitable march.
My sense of helplessness was overwhelming. What I wanted to do was pull some massive emergency brake on the universe, like the brakes I'd seen on the subways during our school trip to New York City. I wanted to call a time out, to demand that everybody just STOP until I could understand everything. I suppose this was the beginning of what my dear friend Richard from Texas calls my "control issues." Of course, my efforts and worry were useless. The closer I watched time, the faster it spun, and that summer went by so quickly that it made my head hurt, and at the end of every day I remember thinking, "Another one gone," and bursting into tears.
I have searched for contentment for so many years in so many ways, and all these acquisitions and accomplishments - they exhaust you in the end. Life, if you keep chasing it so hard, will drive you to death. At some point you have to stop. You have to admit that you can't catch time. At some point, as Richard keeps telling me, you have to let go and sit still and allow contentment to come to you.
Letting go, of course, is a scary enterprise for those of us who believe that the world revolves only because it has a handle on the top of it which we personally turn, and that if we were to drop this handle for even a moment, well - that would be the end of the universe. But try dropping it, Groceries. This is the message I'm getting. Sit quietly for now and cease your relentless participation. Watch what happens. The birds do not crash dead out of the sky in mid-flight, after all. The trees do not die, the rivers do not run red with blood. Life continues to go on. Why are you so sure that your micromanagement of every moment in this whole world is so essential? Why don't you let it be?
I hear this argument and it appeals to me. I believe in it, intellectually. But then I wonder - with this stupidly hungry nature of mine - what should I do with my energy, instead?
That answer arrives, too:
Look for God, suggests my Guru. Look for God like a man with his head on fire looks for water.
When I tried this morning, after an hour or so of unhappy thinking, to dip back into my meditation, I took a new idea with me: compassion. Instead of thinking that I was a failure, could I perhaps accept that I am only a human being - and a normal one, at that? The thoughts came up as usual - OK, so it will be - and then the emotions rose, too. I began feeling frustrated and judgmental about myself, lonely and angry. But then a fierce response boiled up from somewhere in the deepest caverns of my heart, and I told myself, "I will not judge you for these thoughts."
My mind tried to protest, said, "Yeah, but you're such a failure, you're such a loser - "
But suddenly it was like a lion was roaring from within my chest. A voice roared in me like nothing I had ever heard before. It was so internally, eternally loud that I actually clamped my hand over my mouth because I was afraid that if I opened my mouth and let this sound out, it would shake the foundations of buildings as far away as Detroit.
And this is what it roared:
The chattering, negative thoughts in my mind scattered in the wind of this statement like birds - they ran away, terrified. Silence followed. An intense, vibrating silence. The lion in the giant savannah of my heart surveyed his newly quiet kingdom with satisfaction. He closed his yellow eyes and went back to sleep.
And then, in that regal silence, finally - I began to meditate on (and with) God.
This morning, after I heard the lion roar YOU HAVE NO IDEA HOW STRONG MY LOVE IS, I came out of that meditation cave like a warrior queen. Richard didn't even have time to ask if I thought I'd ever achieve anything in this life before I looked him eye to eye and said, "I already have, mister."
"This is cause for celebration," Richard said. "Come on, kiddo - I'll take you into town, buy you a Thumbs-Up."
Thumbs-Up is an Indian soft drink, sort of like Coca-Cola, but with much more corn syrup and caffeine. A few times a week, Richard and I wander into town and share one small bottle of Thumbs-Up - a radical experience after the purity of vegetarian Ashram food. We are always careful not to touch the bottle with our lips. Richard's rule about traveling in India is wise: "Don't touch anything but yourself." (And, yes, that was also a variant of the title for this book.)
We have our favorite visits in town, always stopping to say hello to Mr. Panicar, the tailor, who shakes our hands and says, "Congratulations to meet you!" every time. We watch the women doing road work under the very hot sun, swinging hammers, barefoot, looking so strangely beautiful in their jewel-colored saris and their necklaces and bracelets. They give us dazzling smiles which I can't begin to understand - how can they be happy doing this rough work under such terrible conditions? Why don't they all faint and die after fifteen minutes in the boiling heat with those hammers? I ask Mr. Panicar the tailor about it and he says that people in this part of the world were born to this kind of hard labor and work is all they are used to.
"Also," he adds casually, "we don't live very long around here."
It is a poor village, of course, but not desperate by the standards of India; the presence (and charity) of the Ashram and some Western currency floating around makes a significant difference. There are some Kashmiri guys - very shrewd salesmen, indeed. One of them really came after me today, asking if madam would perhaps like to buy a fine Kashmiri rug for her home?
This made Richard laugh. He enjoys making fun of me for being homeless.
"Save your breath, brother," he said to the rug salesman.
"This old girl hasn't got any floors to put a rug on."
After that, the Kashmiri salesman suggested, "Then perhaps madam would like to hang a rug on her wall?"
"See, now," said Richard, "that's the thing - she has no walls these days, too."
"But I have a brave heart!" I said, in my own defense.
"And other excellent qualities," added Richard, smiling at me.
The biggest obstacle in my Ashram experience is not meditation, actually. There's something even harder for me here. It is what we do every morning after meditation and before breakfast - a chant called the Gurugita. I do not like it at all, never have, not since the first time I heard it at the Ashram in New York. I love all the other chants and hymns of this Yogic tradition, but the Gurugita feels long, tedious and insufferable. That's just my opinion, of course; other people claim to love it, though I can't understand why.
The Gurugita is 182 verses long, for crying out loud, and each verse is a paragraph of impenetrable Sanskrit. The entire ritual takes about an hour and half to perform. This is before breakfast, remember, and after we have already had an hour of meditation and a twenty-minute chanting of the first morning hymn. The Gurugita is basically the reason you have to get up at 3:00 AM around here.
The Gurugita has an impressive spiritual roots; it's an excerpt from a holy ancient scripture, most of which has been lost, and little of which has been translated out of Sanskrit. It's written in the form of a conversation. The conversation is between the goddess Parvati and the almighty god Shiva. Parvati and Shiva are the divine embodiment of creativity (the feminine) and consciousness (the masculine). She is the generative energy of the universe; he is its formless wisdom. Whatever Shiva imagines, Parvati brings to life. He dreams it; she materializes it. Their dance, their union (their Yoga), is both the cause of the universe and its manifestation.
I had hoped my feelings about the Gurugita would change during my stay at the Ashram. I'd hoped that putting it in an Indian context would help me learn how to love the thing. In fact, the opposite has happened. Over the few weeks that I've been here, my feelings about the Gurugita have shifted from simple dislike to solid dread. I've started skipping it and doing other things with my morning that I think are much better for my spiritual growth, like writing in my journal, or taking a shower, or calling my sister.
But when I try to go to the chant, all it does is agitate me. I mean, physically. It makes me sweat. I come out of the temple after the Gurugita and the sweat rises off my skin in the cold morning air. The physical reaction is mild compared to the hot waves of emotion that rock me as I try to sing the thing. And I can't even sing it. I can only croak it. Resentfully.
Did I mention that it has 182 verses?
So a few days ago, I decided to seek advice from my favorite teacher around here - a monk with a wonderfully long Sanskrit name which translates as "He Who Dwells in the Heart of the Lord Who Dwells Within His Own Heart." This monk is American, in his sixties, smart and educated.
I knew I could trust him to let me speak frankly about my problems with the Gurugita. We went for a walk in the gardens together one night after dinner, and I told him how much I disliked the thing and asked if he could please excuse me from having to sing it anymore. He immediately started laughing. He said, "You don't have to sing it if you don't want to. Nobody around here is ever going to make you do anything you don't want to do."
"But people say it's a vital spiritual practice."
"It is. But I'm not going to tell you that you're going to go to hell if you don't do it. The only thing I'll tell you is that your Guru has been very clear about this - the Gurugita is the one essential text of this Yoga, and maybe the most important practice you can do, next to meditation."
I explained to the monk why I dread the Gurugita, how tortuous it feels.
He said, "Wow - look at you. Even just talking about it you're getting all bent out of shape."
"Look," he answered, "the Gurugita isn't supposed to be a fun song to sing. It has a different function. It's a text of unimaginable power. It is a mighty purifying practice. It burns away all your negative emotions. And I think it's probably having a positive effect on you if you're experiencing such strong emotions and physical reactions while you're chanting it. This stuff can be painful, but it's awfully beneficial."
"How do you keep the motivation to stay with it?"
"What's the alternative? To quit whenever something gets challenging?"
"What should I do?"
"You have to decide for yourself. But my advice - since you asked - is that you stick to chanting the Gurugita while you're here, especially because you're having such an extreme reaction to it. If something is rubbing so hard against you, you can be sure it's working on you. This is what the Gurugita does. It burns away the ego. It's supposed to be hard, Liz. It has power beyond what can be rationally understood. You're only staying at the Ashram another week, right? And then you're free to go traveling and have fun. So just chant the thing seven more times, then you never have to do it again. Remember what our Guru says - be a scientist of your own spiritual experience. You're not here as a tourist or a journalist; you're here as a seeker. So explore it."
"So you're not letting me off the hook?"
"You can let yourself off the hook anytime you want, Liz. That's the divine contract of a little something we call free will."
So I went to the chant the next morning, all full of resolve, and the Gurugita made me feel awful. The following day it was even worse. I woke up in a fury, and before I even got to the temple I was already sweating, boiling.
My anger was giant. It took in everyone in this world, but it was most specifically directed at Swamiji - my Guru's master, who had instituted this ritual chanting of the Gurugita in the first place. He was the one who had come to me in my dream on the beach, demanding to know how I intended to stop the tide, and I always felt like he was riding me.
Swamiji had been born into a wealthy family and had been expected to enter the family business. But when he was just a young boy, he met a holy man in a small village near his, and had been deeply touched by the experience. Still in his teens, Swamiji left home and spent years going to every holy spot in India, searching for a true spiritual master. He met over sixty saints and Gurus, never finding the teacher he wanted. He starved, wandered on foot, slept outside in Himalayan snowstorms, suffered from malaria, dysentery - and called these the happiest years of his life, just searching for somebody who would show God to him. Over those years, Swamiji became a Hatha Yogi, an expert in ayurvedic medicine and cooking, an architect, a gardener, a musician and a swordfighter (this I love). By his middle years, he had still not found a Guru, until one day he encountered a naked, mad sage who told him to go back home, back to the village where he had met the holy man as a child, and to study with that great saint.
Swamiji obeyed, returned home, and became the holy man's most devoted student, finally achieving enlightenment through his master's guidance. Eventually, Swamiji became a Guru himself. Overtime, his Ashram in India grew from three rooms on a farm to the wonderful garden it is today. Then he got the inspiration to go traveling and incite a worldwide meditation revolution. He came to America in 1970 and blew everybody's mind. He gave divine initiation - shaktipat - to hundreds and thousands of people a day. He had a power that was transformative.
Swamiji demanded enthusiasm, commitment, self-control. He brought ancient concepts of discipline to the lives of his young Western followers. He was complicated but truly world-changing. The reason we have access now in the West to many ancient Yogic scriptures is that Swamiji presided over the translation and revitalization of philosophical texts that had long been forgotten even in much of India.
My Guru was Swamiji's most devoted student. She was literally born to be his disciple; her Indian parents were amongst his earliest followers. When she was only a child, she often chanted for eighteen hours a day, tireless in her devotion. Swamiji recognized her potential, and he chose her to be his translator when she was still a teenager. She traveled all over the world with him. She became his successor in 1982, still in her twenties.
All true Gurus are alike in the fact that they exist in a constant state of self-realization, but external characteristics differ. The apparent differences between my Guru and her master are vast - she's a feminine, multilingual, university-educated woman; he was a sometimes-capricious, sometimes-kingly South Indian old lion. For a nice New England girl like me, it is easy to follow my living teacher. But Swamiji... he was such a wild card. And from the first time I came to this Yogic path and saw photographs of him, and heard stories about him, I've thought, "I'm just going to stay clear of this character. He's too big. He makes me nervous."
But now that I am here in India, here in the Ashram that was his home, I'm finding that all I want is Swamiji. All I feel is Swamiji. The only person I talk to in my prayers and meditations is Swamiji. Even in his death, there's something so present about him. He's the master I need when I'm really struggling, because I can curse him and show him all my failures and flaws and all he does is laugh. Laugh, and love me. His laughter makes me angrier and the anger motivates me to act. And I never feel him closer to me than when I'm struggling through the Gurugita. I'm arguing with Swamiji the whole time in my head, making all kinds of proclamations, like, "You better be doing something for me because I'm doing this for you! I better see some results here! This better be purifying!"
Every once in a while I recall that I used to live in Rome and spend my leisurely mornings eating pastries and drinking cappuccino and reading the newspaper.
That sure was nice.
Though it seems very far away now.
This morning, I overslept. I woke up at 4:15 AM only minutes before the Gurugita began. I got out of bed, splashed some water on my face, dressed and went to leave my room... only to find that my roommate had left the room before me and had locked me in.
My first thought was that it was a very good excuse not to go to the Gurugita. My second thought, though? Well - it wasn't even a thought. It was an action.
I jumped out the window.
I jumped through the dark air to the concrete sidewalk below, hitting something on the way down that peeled a long strip of skin off my right leg, but I didn't care. I ran barefoot, with my pulse slamming in my ears, all the way to the temple, found a seat, opened up my prayer book just as the chant was beginning and I started to sing the Gurugita.
I sat there, singing and bleeding and thinking that it was maybe time for me to change my relationship with this particular spiritual practice. The Gurugita is a hymn of pure love, but something had been stopping me from offering up that love in sincerity. So as I chanted each verse I realized that I needed to find something - or somebody - to whom I could devote this hymn, in order to find a place of pure love within me. By Verse Twenty, I had it: Nick.
Nick, my nephew, is an eight-year-old boy, skinny for his age, very smart, sensitive and complex. This is a child for whom life is never simple, a child who hears and sees and feels everything intensely. I love this boy so deeply and protectively. I realized - doing the math on the time difference between India and Pennsylvania - that it was his bedtime back home. So I sang the Gurugita to my nephew Nick, to help him sleep. Sometimes he has trouble sleeping because he cannot still his mind. So each devotional word of this hymn, I dedicated to Nick. I filled the song with everything I wished I could teach him about life. I told him everything through this old Sanskrit scripture, and soon I noticed that I was weeping cool tears. But before I could wipe the tears away the Gurugita was over. The hour and a half was finished. It felt like ten minutes had passed. I realized what had happened - that Nicky had carried me through it. The little soul I'd wanted to help had actually been helping me.
Needless to say, I never missed the Gurugita again, and it became the most holy of my practices at the Ashram. And, of course, I called my sister the next week and she said that - for reasons nobody could understand - Nick suddenly wasn't having trouble falling asleep anymore.
It was then I decided I needed to stay here at the Ashram. This was so totally not my original plan. My original plan had been to stay here for just six weeks, have a bit of transcendental experience, then continue traveling all over India... um... looking for God.
On the other hand, the Zen masters always say that you cannot see your reflection in running water, only in still water. So something was telling me it would be wrong to run off now, when so much was happening right here in this small, sheltered place where every minute of the day is organized to help self-exploration and devotional practice. Is more travel really going to bring me any closer to contact with divinity?
I didn't know what to do. I spent a day thinking over the decision. As usual, Richard from Texas had the last word.
"Stay put, Groceries," he said. "Forget about sightseeing - you got the rest of your life for that. You're on a spiritual journey, baby. You got a personal invitation from God here - are you really going to turn that away?"
"But what about all those beautiful things to see in India?" I asked. "Isn't it a pity to travel halfway around the world just to stay in a little Ashram the whole time?"
"Groceries, baby, listen your friend Richard. If you come to meditation cave every day for the next three months, I promise you this - you're going to start seeing some stuff that's so beautiful it'll make you want to throw rocks at the Taj Mahal."
One evening, I tried something new. I'd recently met a woman at the Ashram who'd been studying Vipassana meditation. Vipassana is an ultraorthodox, very intensive Buddhist meditation technique. Basically, it's just sitting. An introductory Vipassana course lasts for ten days, during which time you sit for ten hours a day in stretches of silence that last two to three hours at a time. Your Vipassana master won't even give you a mantra. Vipassana meditation is the practice of pure witnessing your mind and offering your complete consideration to your thought patterns, but allowing nothing to move you from your seat.
It's physically exhausting too. You are forbidden to shift your body at all. You just sit there and tell yourself, "There's no reason I need to move at all during the next two hours." If you are feeling discomfort then you are supposed to meditate upon that discomfort, watching the effect that physical pain has on you. In our real lives, we are constantly hopping around to adjust ourselves around discomfort - physical, emotional and psychological - in order to avoid the reality of grief and nuisance. Vipassana meditation teaches that grief and nuisance are inevitable in this life, but if you can plant yourself in stillness long enough, you will, in time, experience the truth that everything (both uncomfortable and lovely) does eventually pass.
Cultivating a measure of intelligent detachment in your life can be a valuable instrument of peace. So I found a quiet bench in one of the Ashram gardens and decided to sit in meditation for an hour - Vipassana-style. No movement, no agitation, not even mantra - just pure witnessing. Let's see what comes up. Unfortunately, I had forgotten about what "comes up" at dusk in India: mosquitoes. As soon as I sat down on that bench, I could hear the mosquitoes coming at me, brushing against my face and landing on my head, ankles, arms. And then their fierce little bums. I didn't like this. I thought, "This is a bad time of day to practice Vipassana meditation."
On the other hand - when is it a good time of day, or life, to sit in detached stillness? When isn't there something buzzing about, trying to distract you? So I made a decision (inspired again by my Guru's instruction that we are to become scientists of our own inner experience). I presented myself with an experiment - what if I sat through the discomfort, just for one hour of my long life?
So I did it. In stillness, I watched myself get eaten by mosquitoes. To be honest, part of me was wondering what this little experiment was meant to prove, but another part of me well knew - it was a beginner's attempt at self-mastery. If I could sit through this nonlethal physical discomfort, then what other discomforts might I someday be able to sit through? What about emotional discomforts, which are even harder for me to endure? What about jealousy, anger, fear, disappointment, loneliness, shame, boredom?
The itch was maddening at first but eventually it just turned into a general burning feeling and I rode that heat to a mild euphoria. I allowed the pain to become pure sensation - neither good nor bad, just intense - and that intensity lifted me out of myself and into meditation. I sat there for two hours.
Let me be clear about one thing. I realized that in my thirty-four years on earth I have never not slapped at a mosquito when it was biting me. I've been a puppet to this and to millions of other small and large signals of pain or pleasure throughout my life. Whenever something happens, I always react. But here I was - disregarding the reflex. I was doing something I'd never done before. A small thing, yes, but how often can I say that? And what will I be able to do tomorrow that I cannot yet do today?
When it was all over, I stood up, walked to my room and assessed the damage. I counted about twenty mosquito bites. But within a half an hour, all the bites had vanished. It all goes away. Eventually, everything goes away.
In the search for God, you turn away from what attracts you and swim toward that which is difficult. You leave your comforting and familiar habits with the hope (only hope!) that something greater will be offered you in return for what you've given up.
The devout of this world perform their rituals without guarantee that anything good will ever come of it. Faith is a way of saying, "Yes, I pre-accept the terms of the universe and I embrace in advance what I am presently incapable of understanding." If faith were rational, it wouldn't be - by definition - faith. Faith is belief in what you cannot see or prove or touch. If we truly knew all the answers in advance as to the meaning of life and the nature of God and the destiny of our souls, our belief would not be a courageous act of humanity; it would just be... an insurance policy.
I'm not interested in the insurance industry. I couldn't care less about evidence and proof. I just want God. I want God inside me. I want God to play in my bloodstream the way sunlight amuses itself on water.
My prayers are becoming more deliberate and specific. Every morning before meditation, I kneel in the temple and talk for a few minutes to God. I found during the beginning of my stay here at the Ashram that I was often tired, confused and bored during those divine conversations. I remember kneeling down one morning, touching my forehead to the floor and saying to my creator, "Oh, I don't know what I need... but you must have some ideas... so just do something about it, would you?"
Of course God already knows what I need. The question is - do I know? There's a wonderful old Italian joke about a poor man who goes to church every day and prays before the statue of a great saint, begging, "Dear saint - please, please, please... give me the grace to win the lottery." This happens for months. Finally the annoyed statue comes to life, looks down at the begging man and says, "My son - please, please, please... buy a ticket."
Prayer is a relationship; half the job is mine. If I want transformation, but can't even be bothered to articulate what, exactly, I'm aiming for, how will it ever occur? Half the benefit of prayer is in the asking itself, in the offering of a well-considered intention. If you don't have this, all your pleas and desires swirl at your feet in a cold fog and never lift. So now I take the time every morning to search myself for specificity about what I am truly asking for. I kneel there in the temple with my face on that cold marble for as long as it takes me to formulate an authentic prayer.
Destiny, I feel, is also a relationship - a play between divine grace and willful self-effort. Half of it you have no control over; half of it is absolutely in your hands. Man is neither entirely a puppet of the gods, nor is he entirely the captain of his own destiny; he's a little of both.
There is so much about my fate that I cannot control, but other things I can choose. I can decide how I spend my time, whom I share my body and life and money and energy with. I can select what I eat and read and study. I can choose how I'm going to regard unfortunate circumstances in my life - whether I will see them as curses or opportunities. I can choose my words and the tone of voice in which I speak to others. And most of all, I can choose my thoughts.
On first glance, this seems a nearly impossible task. Control your thoughts? Instead of the other way around? But imagine if you could? So I've started watching my thoughts all day, and monitoring them. I repeat this vow about 700 times a day: "I will not harbor unhealthy thoughts anymore." The first time I heard myself say this, my inner ear perked up at the word "harbor," which is a noun as well as a verb. A harbor, of course, is a place of refuge, a port of entry. I pictured the harbor of my mind. The harbor of my mind is an open bay, the only access to the island of my Self (which is a young and volcanic island, yes, but promising). This island has been through some wars, it is true, but it is now peaceful, under a new leader (me) who has instituted new policies to protect the place.
You may not come here anymore with your hard and abusive thoughts, with your plague ships of thoughts, with your slave ships of thoughts, with your warships of thoughts - all these will be turned away. This is a peaceful harbor, the entryway to a fine and proud island that is only now beginning to cultivate tranquillity. If you can obey these new laws, my dear thoughts, then you are welcome in my mind.
That is my mission, and it will never end.
I've made good friends with this seventeen-year-old Indian girl named Tulsi. She works with me scrubbing the temple floors every day. Every evening we take a walk through the gardens of the Ashram together and talk about God and hip-hop music, two subjects for which Tulsi feels equivalent devotion. Tulsi is so many interesting and foreign things to me at once - a teenager, an Indian girl, a rebel in her family, a soul who is really crazy about God. She also speaks a delightful English - the kind of English you can find only in India - which includes such colonial words as "splendid!" and "nonsense!"
She's exactly half my age, and practically half my size.
Tulsi and I have been talking a lot about marriage lately during our walks. Soon she will turn eighteen, and this is the age when she will be regarded as a legitimate marriage prospect. It will happen like this - after her eighteenth birthday, she will be required to attend family weddings dressed in a sari, signaling her womanhood. Some nice Amma ("Aunty") will come and sit beside her, start asking questions and getting to know her: "How old are you? What's your family background? What does your father do? What universities are you applying to? What are your interests? When is your birthday?" And then, Tulsi's dad will get a big envelope in the mail with a photo of this woman's grandson who is studying computer sciences in Delhi, along with the boy's astrology charts and his university grades and the inevitable question, "Would your daughter care to marry him?"
Tulsi had to go to another cousin's wedding last week, and she was saying (in very un-Indian fashion) how much she hates weddings. All that dancing and gossip. All that dressing up. She would rather be at the Ashram scrubbing floors and meditating. Nobody else in her family can understand this; her devotion to God is beyond anything they consider normal.
I asked her if she wanted to ever get married and she said:
"Noooooooooooooooooooooo..."
"I want to travel!" she said. "Like you."
"You know, Tulsi, I couldn't always travel like this. I was married once."
She frowned at me through her specs, studying me with a puzzled look. In the end, she pronounced: "You, married? I cannot picture this."
"But it's true - I was."
"Are you the one who ended the marriage?"
"Yes."
She said, "I think it's really good that you ended your marriage. You seem splendidly happy now. But as for me - how did I get here? Why was I born an Indian girl? It's outrageous! Why did I come into this family? Why must I attend so many weddings?"
Then Tulsi ran around in a circle, shouting (quite loudly for Ashram standards): "I want to live in Hawaii!!!"
Richard from Texas was married once, too. He had two sons, both of whom are grown men now, both close to their dad. Sometimes Richard mentions his ex-wife, and he always seems to speak of her with fondness. I get a bit envious whenever I hear this, imagining how lucky Richard is to be friends with his former spouse, even after separating. This is an odd side effect of my terrible divorce; whenever I hear of couples splitting kindly, I get jealous.
So I asked Richard one day about it. I said, "It seems like you have fond feelings toward your ex-wife. Are you two still close?"
"No," he said casually. "She thinks I changed my name to Motherfucker."
Richard's lack of concern about this impressed me. My own ex-spouse thinks I changed my name too, and it breaks my heart. One of the hardest things about this divorce was the fact that my ex-husband never forgave me for leaving. No. And that felt like it would never change, never release.
I was talking about all this one day with my friends at the Ashram - the newest member of whom is a plumber from New Zealand. He's a poet, too, who had recently published a terrific memoir in New Zealand called A Plumber's Progress about his own spiritual journey. The plumber/poet from New Zealand, Richard from Texas, the Irish dairy farmer, Tulsi, the Indian teenager, and Vivian, an older woman with white hair and humorous eyes (who used to be a nun in South Africa) - this was my circle of close friends here.
So, during lunch one day, we were all having this conversation together about marriage, and the plumber/poet from New Zealand said, "I see marriage as an operation that sews two people together, and divorce is a kind of amputation that can take a long time to heal. The longer you were married, or the rougher the amputation, the harder it is to recover."
Richard from Texas was wondering if I was planning on allowing my ex-husband to dictate for the rest of my life how I felt about myself, and I said I wasn't too sure about that, actually, and to be honest I was still halfway waiting for the man to forgive me, to release me and allow me to go forth in peace.
"What I hate about the way my marriage ended," I said, "is that it's so unresolved. It's just an open wound that never goes away."
"If you insist," said Richard. "If that's how you've decided to think about it, don't let me spoil your party."
"One of these days this has to end," I said. "I just wish I knew how."
When lunch ended, the plumber/poet from New Zealand slipped me a note. It said to meet him after dinner; he wanted to show me something. So after dinner that night I met him by the meditation caves, and he told me to follow him, that he had a gift for me. He walked me across the Ashram, then led me to a building I'd never been inside before, unlocked a door and took me up a back set of stairs. He knew of this place, I guessed, because he fixes all the air-conditioning units, and some of them are located up there. At the top of the stairs there was a door which he unlocked. Then we were up on a gorgeous rooftop, tiled in ceramic chips that glittered in the evening twilight. He took me across that roof to a little tower, a minaret, really, and showed me another narrow set of stairs, leading to the very top of the tower. He pointed to the tower and said, "I'm going to leave you now. You're going to go up there. Stay up there until it's finished."
"Until what's finished?" I asked.
The plumber just smiled, handed me a flashlight, "for getting down safely when it's over," and also handed me a folded piece of paper. Then he left.
I climbed to the top of the tower. I was now standing at the tallest place in the Ashram, with a view overlooking the river valley. Mountains and farmland stretched out as far as I could see. The sun was going down right now. The breeze was warm. I unfolded the piece of paper the plumber/poet had given me.
He had typed:
Life's metaphors are God's instructions.
You have just climbed up and above the roof. There is nothing between you and the Infinite. Now, let go.
The day is ending. It's time for something that was beautiful to turn into something else that is beautiful. Now, let go.
Your wish for resolution was a prayer. Your being here is God's response. Let go, and watch the stars come out - on the outside and on the inside.
With all your, heart, ask for grace, and let go.
With all your heart, forgive him, FORGIVE YOURSELF, and let him go.
Let your intention be freedom from useless suffering. Then, let go.
Watch the heat of day pass into the cool night. Let go.
When the karma of a relationship is done, only love remains. It's safe. Let go.
When the past has passed from you at last, let go. Then climb down and begin the rest of your life. With great joy.
For the first few minutes, I couldn't stop laughing. I watched the sun go down, and then I lay down on my back and watched the stars come out. I sang a small little prayer in Sanskrit. Soon the whole sky was a flashy show of stars. The only thing between me and God was... nothing.
Then I shut my eyes and I said, "Dear Lord, please show me everything I need to understand about forgiveness."
What I had wanted for so long was to have an actual conversation with my ex-husband, but this was obviously never going to happen. And I was sure of this, too - that the rules of transcendence insist that you will not advance even one inch closer to divinity as long as you cling to even one last thread of blame. So what I asked of God that night on the Ashram roof was - might there be some level upon which we could communicate? Some level on which we could forgive?
I lay up there, high above the world, and I was all alone. I dropped into meditation and waited to be told what to do. I don't know how many minutes or hours passed before I knew what to do. I realized I'd been thinking about all this too literally. I'd wanted to talk to my ex-husband? So talk to him. Talk to him right now. I'd been waiting to be offered forgiveness? Offer it up personally, then. Right now. From that place of meditation, I found the answer - you can finish the business yourself, from within yourself. It's not only possible, it's necessary.
And then, to my surprise, still in meditation, I did an odd thing. I invited my ex-husband to join me up here on this rooftop in India. I asked him if he would be kind enough to meet me up here for this farewell event. Then I waited until I felt him arrive. And he arrived. His presence was suddenly absolute. I could practically smell him.
I said, "Hi, sweetie."
I almost started to cry right then, but quickly realized I didn't need to. Tears are part of this bodily life, and the place where these two souls were meeting that night in India had nothing to do with the body. The two people who needed to talk to each other up there on the roof were not even people anymore. They were just two cool blue souls who already understood everything. Unbound by their bodies, unbound by the complex history of their past relationship, they came together above this roof (above me, even) in infinite wisdom. Still in meditation, I watched these two cool blue souls join, divide again and regard each other's perfection and similarity. They knew everything. They knew everything long ago and they will always know everything. They didn't need to forgive each other; they were born forgiving each other.
The lesson they were teaching me in their beautiful turning was, "Stay out of this, Liz. Your part of this relationship is over. Let us work things out from now on. You go on with your life."
Much later I opened my eyes, and I knew it was over. Not just my marriage and not just my divorce, but all the unfinished hollow sadness of it... it was over. I could feel that I was free. Let me be clear - it's not that I would never again think about my ex-husband, or never again have any emotions attached to the memory of him. It's just that this ritual on the rooftop had finally given me a place where I could house those thoughts and feelings whenever they would arise in the future.
This is what rituals are for. We do spiritual ceremonies as human beings in order to create a safe resting place for our most complicated feelings of joy or trauma, so that we don't have to drag those feelings around with us forever. We all need such places of ritual safekeeping. And I believe that if your culture or tradition doesn't have the specific ritual you need, then you are absolutely permitted to make up your own ceremony, fixing your own broken-down emotional systems.
So I stood up and did a handstand on my Guru's roof, to celebrate my liberation. I felt the dusty tiles under my hands. I felt my own strength and balance. This kind of thing - a spontaneous handstand - isn't something a cool blue soul can do, but a human being can do it. We have hands; we can stand on them if we want to. That's our privilege. That's the joy of a mortal body. And that's why God needs us. Because God loves to feel things through our hands.
Richard from Texas left today. Flew back to Austin. I took the drive with him to the airport, and we were both sad. We stood for a long time on the sidewalk before he went inside.
"What am I going to do when I don't have Liz Gilbert to kick around anymore?" He sighed. Then he said, "You've had a good experience at the Ashram, haven't you? You look different from a few months back, like maybe you dropped out some of that sorrow you had been hauling around."
"I'm feeling really happy these days, Richard."
"So appreciate what you got now, OK? Keep cultivating gratitude. You'll live longer. And, Groceries? Do me a favor? Move ahead with your life, will you?"
"I am."
"What I mean is - find somebody new to love someday. Take the time you need to heal, but don't forget to eventually share your heart with someone. Don't make your life a monument to David or to your ex-husband."
"I won't," I said. And I knew suddenly that it was true. I could feel all this old pain of lost love and past mistakes vanishing before my eyes.
And then Richard spoke again, snapping my thoughts back quickly to the world's more basic realities: "After all, baby, remember what they say - sometimes the best way to get over someone is to get under someone else."
I laughed. "OK, Richard. Now you can go back to Texas."
"Yes," he said, looking around this desolate Indian airport parking lot. "I am not getting any prettier just standing around here."
On my ride back to the Ashram, after seeing Richard off at the airport, I decide that I've been talking too much. I've been thinking lately that this is maybe a spiritual problem. Silence and solitude are universally recognized spiritual practices, and there are good reasons for this. Learning how to discipline your speech is a way of preventing your energies from spilling out of you through your mouth, exhausting you and filling the world with words, words, words instead of peace. Swamiji, my Guru's master, called silence the only true religion. It's ridiculous how much I've been talking at this Ashram, the one place in the world where silence should - and can - reign.
So I'm not going to be the Ashram social bunny anymore, I've decided. No more gossiping and joking. It's time to change. I'm going to make the remainder of my stay a completely quiet experience. This will be difficult, but not impossible, because silence is universally respected at the Ashram. The whole community will support it, recognizing your decision as a disciplined act of devotion. In the bookstore they even sell little badges you can wear which read, "I am in Silence."
I'm going to buy four of those little badges.
On the drive back to the Ashram, I really let myself dip into a fantasy about just how silent I am going to become now. I will be so silent that it will make me famous. People will talk about me. They'll ask, "Who is That Quiet Girl in the Back of the Temple, always scrubbing the floors, down on her knees? She never speaks. She's so mystical. I can't even imagine what her voice sounds like. She moves as silently as the breeze. She must be in a constant state of meditative communion with God. She's the quietest girl I've ever seen."
The next morning I was down on my knees in the temple, scrubbing the marble floor again, in silence, when an Indian teenage boy came looking for me with a message - that I needed to report to the Seva Office immediately. Seva is the Sanskrit term for the spiritual practice of selfless service (for instance, the scrubbing of a temple floor). The Seva Office administers all the work assignments for the Ashram. So I went there, and the nice lady at the desk asked me, "Are you Elizabeth Gilbert?"
I smiled at her and nodded. Silently.
Then she told me that my work detail had been changed.
They had a new position in mind for me at the Ashram.
And the title of my new job was "Key Hostess."
This was so obviously another one of Swamiji's jokes.
You wanted to be The Quiet Girl in the Back of the Temple? Well, guess what...
But this is what always happens at the Ashram. You make some big grandiose decision about what you need to do, or who you need to be, and then circumstances arise that immediately reveal to you how little you understood about yourself. I don't know how many times Swamiji said it during his lifetime, and I don't know how many more times my Guru has repeated it since his death, but it seems I have not quite yet absorbed the truth of their most insistent statement:
"God dwells within you, as you."
AS you.
If there is one holy truth of this Yoga, that line contains it. God dwells within you as you yourself, exactly the way you are. God isn't interested in watching you pretend to be somebody else. We all seem to get this idea that, in order to be sacred, we have to make some massive, dramatic change of character, that we have to renounce our individuality. This is a classic example of what they call in the East "wrong-thinking." Swamiji used to say that every day people discontented with themselves find something new to reject, but it is usually depression, not peace, that they attain.
As Sextus, the ancient Pythagorian philospher, said, "The wise man is always similar to himself."
This doesn't mean I cannot be devout. This does not mean I cannot serve humanity. It doesn't mean I can't improve myself as a human being, working daily to minimize my vices. For instance, I'm never going to be a wallflower, but that doesn't mean I can't take a serious look at my talking habits and alter some aspects for the better - working within my personality. Yes, I like talking, but perhaps I don't have to curse so much. Or here's a radical concept - maybe I can stop interrupting others when they are speaking. Because no matter how creatively I try to look at my habit of interrupting, I can't find another way to see it than this: " I believe that what I am saying is more important than what you are saying." And I can't find another way to see that than. "I believe that I am more important than you." And that must end.
All these changes would be useful to make. But even so, even with reasonable modifications to my speaking habits, I probably won't ever be known as That Quiet Girl. No matter how hard I try. Because let's be really honest about who we're dealing with here. When the woman at the Ashram Seva Center gave me my new job assignment of Key Hostess, she said, "We have a special nickname for this position, you know. We call it 'Little Suzy Creamcheese', because whoever does the job needs to be social and bubbly and smiling all the time."
What could I say?
I just stuck out a hand to shake, said good-bye to all my wishful old delusions and announced, "Madam - I'm your girl."
What I will be hosting, to be exact, is a series of retreats at the Ashram this spring. During each retreat, about a hundred devotees will come here from all over the world for a period of a week to ten days, to deepen their meditation practices. My role is to take care of these people during their stay here. For most of the retreat, the participants will be in silence. For some of them, it will be the first time they've experienced silence as a devotional practice, and it can be intense. However, I will be the one person in the Ashram they are allowed to talk to if something is going wrong.
That's right - my job officially requires me to be the speech-magnet.
I will listen to the problems of the retreat participants and then try to find solutions for them. Maybe they'll need to change roommates because of a snoring situation, or maybe they'll need to speak to the doctor - I'll try to solve it. I'll need to know everybody's name, and where they are from.
As the retreats begin, it is so quickly evident how much I am made for this job. I'm sitting there at the Welcome Table with my Hello, My Name Is badge, and these people are arriving from thirty different countries, and many of them have never been to India. They're thirsty, but don't know yet if they can drink the water. They're hungry, but don't know what time lunch is, or where the cafeteria can be found. They're dressed all wrong, wearing synthetics and heavy boots in the tropical heat. They don't know if there's anyone here who speaks Russian.
I can speak a little bit of Russian...
I love all these people, automatically and unconditionally. I can see through their neuroses and recognize that they're lust horribly afraid of what they're going to face when they go into silence and meditation for seven days. They're going deep into their own minds and souls. Even for an experienced meditator, nothing is more unknown than this territory. Anything can happen in there. They'll be guided during this retreat by a wonderful woman, whose every gesture and word is the embodiment of compassion, but they're still afraid because she cannot go with them where they are going. Nobody can.
The topic of the retreat, and its goal, is the turiya state - the elusive fourth level of human consciousness. During the typical human experience, say the Yogis, most of us are always moving between three different levels of consciousness - waking, dreaming or deep dreamless sleep. But there is a fourth level, too. This fourth level is the witness of all the other states, the integral awareness that links the other three levels together. This is the pure consciousness, an intelligent awareness. And if you can move into that state of witness-consciousness, then you can be present with God all the time. This constant awareness and experience of the God-presence within can only happen on a fourth level of human consciousness, which is called turiya.
Here's how you can tell if you've reached the turiya state - if you're in a state of constant bliss. One who is living from within turiya is not affected by the swinging moods of the mind, nor fearful of time or harmed by loss. The great saints, the great Gurus, the great prophets of history - they were all living in the turiya state, all the time. As for the rest of us, most of us have been there, too, if only for fleeting moments. Most of us, even if only for two minutes in our lives, have experienced at some time or another an inexplicable and random sense of complete bliss, unrelated to anything that was happening in the outside world.
Of course, for most of us this state passes as fast as it came. It's almost like you are shown your inner perfection as a tease and then you tumble back to "reality" very quickly. Over the centuries, people have tried to hold on to that state of blissful perfection through all sorts of external means - through drugs and sex and power and adrenaline - but it doesn't keep. In order to get to your perfection you must leave the busy commotion of the mind and the desires of the ego and enter into the silence of the heart. The kundalini shakti - the supreme energy of the divine - will take you there.
This is what everyone has come here for.
I spend the entire retreat in the back of the temple, watching over the participants as they meditate. It is my job to be concerned about their comfort, paying careful attention to see if anyone is in trouble or need. They've all taken vows of silence for the duration of the retreat.
As these hundred souls meditate, I have no idea what they're thinking or feeling, but I know what they want to experience, and I find myself in a constant state of prayer to God on their behalf like, Please give these wonderful people any blessings you might have originally prepared for me. It's not my intention to go into meditation at the same time the retreat participants are meditating; I'm keeping an eye on them, not worrying about my own spiritual journey. But I find myself every day lifted on the waves of their collective devotional Intention. So one Thursday afternoon in the back of the temple, right in the midst of my Key Hostess duties, wearing my name-tag and everything - I am suddenly transported through the portal of the universe and taken to the center of God's palm.
I don't want to say that what I experienced that Thursday afternoon in India was indescribable, even though it was. I'll try to explain anyway. Simply put, I got pulled through the tunnel of the Absolute, and in that rush I suddenly understood the mechanism of the universe completely. I left my body, I left the room, I left the planet, I stepped through time and I entered the void. I was inside the void, but I also was the void and I was looking at the void, all at the same time. The void was a place of limitless peace and wisdom. The void was conscious and it was intelligent. The void was God, which means that I was inside God. I was both a tiny piece of the universe and exactly the same size as the universe.
It was heaven, yes. It was the deepest love I'd ever experienced, but it wasn't euphoric. It wasn't exciting. There wasn't enough ego or passion left in me to create euphoria and excitement. It was just obvious.
The place in which I was standing can't be described like an earthly location. It was neither dark nor light, neither big nor small. Nor was it a place, nor was I technically standing there, nor was I exactly "I" anymore. I still had my thoughts, but they were so modest, quiet and observatory. I felt unhesitating compassion and unity with everything and everybody. I also felt mildly charmed by all my old ideas about who I am and what I'm like. I'm a woman, I come from America, I'm talkative, I'm a writer - all this felt so cute and obsolete.
I don't know how long I was in this magnificent ether of union before I had a sudden thought: "I want to hold on to this experience forever!" And that's when I started to tumble out of it. Just those two little words - I want!- and I began to slide back to earth. Then my mind started to really protest - No! I don't want to leave here!- and I slid further still.
I want!
I don't want!
I want!
I don't want!
With each repetition of those desperate thoughts, I could feel myself falling through layer after layer of illusion. This return of useless longing was bringing me back again into my own small borders, my own mortal confines. I felt a tremor of panic, mildly heartbroken because I lost this divine experience. But exactly parallel to that panic I could also sense a witness, a wiser and older me, who just shook her head and smiled, knowing this: If I believed that this state of bliss was something that could be taken away from me, then I obviously didn't understand it yet. And therefore, I was not yet ready to inhabit it completely. I have to practice more. At that moment of realization, that's when God let me go, let me slide through His fingers with this last compassionate, unspoken message:
You may return here once you have fully come to understands that you are always here.
The retreat ended two days later, and everyone came out of silence. I got so many hugs from people, thanking me for my help.
"Oh, no! Thank you" I kept saying, feeling how inadequate those words sounded.
Another one hundred seekers arrived a week later for another retreat, and the teachings and the brave travels inward and the silence were all repeated, with new souls in practice. I watched over them, too, and tried to help in every possible way and glided back into turiya a few times with them, too. I could only laugh later when many of them came out of their meditations to tell me that I had appeared to them during the retreat as a "silent, gliding, ethereal presence." So this was the Ashram's final joke on me? Once I had learned to accept my loud, chatty, social nature and fully embrace my inner Key Hostess - only then could I become The Quiet Girl in the Back of the Temple, after all?
In my final weeks there, every morning, it seemed, some more people and some more luggage got on a bus and left. There were no new arrivals. There would be no more retreats, so I was relocated for work again, now placed in the Office of Registration, where I had the bittersweet job of officially "departing" all my friends off the computer once they had left the Ashram.
I'm getting a lot of time alone here now. I'm spending about four or five hours every day in the meditation caves. I can sit in my own company for hours at a time now, at ease in my own presence, undisturbed by my own existence on the planet. Sometimes my meditations are experiences of shakti - all spine-twisting, blood-boiling wildness. I try to give in to it with as little resistance as possible. Other times I experience a sweet, quiet contentment, and that is fine, too. The sentences still form in my mind, and thoughts still do their little dance, but I know my thought patterns so well now that they don't bother me anymore. My thoughts have become like old neighbors, kind of bothersome but they don't agitate my home. There's room for all of us in this neighborhood.
As for other changes within me during these last few months, perhaps I can't even feel them yet. My friends who have been studying Yoga for a long time say you don't really see the impact that an Ashram has had on you until you leave the place and return to your normal life. You may find that lifelong obsessions are gone. Petty irritations that once maddened you are no longer problems. Poisonous relationships vanish, and brighter people start arriving into your world.
Last night I couldn't sleep. Not out of anxiety, but out of thrilled anticipation. I got dressed and went out for a walk through the gardens. The moon was fantastically ripe and full. The air was perfumed with jasmine. The day had been humid and hot, and now it was only slightly less humid and hot. The warm air shifted around me and I realized: "I'm in India!"
I'm in my sandals and I'm in India!
I ran, galloping away from the path and down into the meadow. My body felt so alive and healthy from all these months of Yoga and vegetarian food and early bedtimes. My sandals on the soft dewy grass made this sound: shippa-shippa-shippa-shippa, and that was the only sound in the whole valley. I was so happy I ran straight to the clump of eucalyptus trees in the middle of the park and I threw my arms around one of those trees, which was still warm from the day's heat, and I kissed it with such passion.
It was pure, this love that I was feeling. It was godly. I looked around the darkened valley and I could see nothing that was not God. I felt so deeply, terribly happy. I thought to myself, "Whatever this feeling is - this is what I have been praying for. And this is also what I have been praying to."
By the way, I found my word.
I'd been wondering about my word ever since that afternoon back in Rome when my Italian friend Giulio had told me that Rome's word is SEX, and had asked me what mine was. I didn't know the answer then, but I thought my word would show up eventually, and that I'd recognize it when I saw it.
So I saw it during my last week at the Ashram. I was reading through an old text about Yoga, when I found a description of ancient spiritual seekers. A Sanskrit word appeared in the paragraph: ANTEVASIN. It means "one who lives at the border." In ancient times this was a literal description. It indicated a person who had left the active center of worldly life to go live at the edge of the forest where the spiritual masters dwelled. The antevasin was not one of the villagers anymore - not a householder with a conventional life. But neither was he yet a transcendent - not one of those sages who live deep in the unexplored woods, fully realized. The antevasin was an in-betweener. He was a border-dweller. He lived in sight of both worlds, but he looked toward the unknown. And he was a scholar.
When I read this description of the antevasin, I got really excited. That's my word, baby! In the modern age, of course, that image of an unexplored forest is figurative, and the border is figurative, too. In the figurative sense, this is a border that is always moving - as you advance forward in your studies and realizations, that mysterious forest of the unknown always stays a few feet ahead of you, so you have to stay mobile, movable, supple.
I've spent so much time these last years wondering what I'm supposed to be. A wife? A mother? A lover? An Italian? A traveler? An artist? A Yogi? But I'm not any of these things, at least not completely. And I'm not Crazy Aunt Liz, either. I'm just an antevasin - a student on the ever-shifting border near the wonderful, scary forest of the new.
I believe that all the world's religions share a desire to find a way to communicate with God. When you want to attain communion with God, what you're really trying to do is move away from the worldly into the eternal and you need some kind of magnificent idea to convey you there.
The Yogic scriptures say that God responds to the sacred prayers and efforts of human beings in any way whatsoever that mortals choose to worship - just so long as those prayers are sincere. As one line from the Upanishads suggests: "People follow different paths, straight or crooked, according to their temperament, depending on which they consider best, or most appropriate - and all reach You, just as rivers enter the ocean."
The other objective of religion, of course, is to try to make sense of our chaotic world and explain the inexplicabilities we see playing out here on earth every day: the innocent suffer, the wicked are rewarded. The Western tradition says, "It'll all get sorted out after death, in heaven and hell." In the East, though, the Upanishads shrug away any attempt to make sense of the world's chaos. They're not even so sure that the world is chaotic, but suggest that it may only appear so to us, because of our limited vision. Furthermore, the Upanishads suggest that so-called chaos may have an actual divine function, even if you personally can't recognize it right now. The best we can do, then, in response to our incomprehensible and dangerous world, is to practice holding balance internally - no matter what insanity is out there.
I have many friends in New York who are not religious people. What I'm seeing in some of my friends, though, as they are aging, is a longing to have something to believe in. But this longing rubs against any number of obstacles, including their intellect and common sense. Despite all their intellect, though, these people still live in a world that twists about in a series of wild and completely nonsensical things. Great and horrible experiences of either suffering or joy occur in the lives of all these people, just as with the rest of us, and these mega-experiences tend to make us long for a spiritual context in which to express either lament or gratitude, or to seek understanding. The problem is - what to worship, whom to pray to?
I think you have every right to choose when it comes to moving your spirit and finding peace in God. I think you are free to search for any way whatsoever which will take you across the worldly divide whenever you need comfort. It's the history of mankind's search for holiness. The evolution of religious thinking involves careful choice. You take whatever works from wherever you can find it, and you keep moving toward the light.
Even if it means coming to India and kissing trees in the moonlight for a while.
My flight leaves India at four in the morning, which is typical of how India works. I decide not to go to sleep at all that night, but to spend the whole evening in one of the meditation caves, in prayer.
I pack my bag and leave it by the temple gate, so I can be ready to grab it and go when the taxi arrives before dawn. And then I go into the meditation cave and I sit. I'm alone in there, but I sit where I can see the big photograph of Swamiji, my Guru's master. I close my eyes and let the mantra come. In my heart, the clock stops and the calendar pages stop flying off the wall. I am not actively praying. I have become a prayer.
I can sit here all night.
In fact, I do.
After several hours of stillness, something gives me a nudge, and when I look at my watch it's exactly time to go. I have to fly to Indonesia now. How funny and strange. So I stand up and bow before the photograph of Swamiji - the bossy, the marvelous. And then I slide a piece of paper under the carpet, right below his image. On the paper are the two poems I wrote during my four months in India. These are the first real poems I've ever written. A plumber from New Zealand encouraged me to try poetry for once - that's why it happened. One of these poems I wrote after having been here only a month. The other, I just wrote this morning.
In the space between the two poems, I have found a lot of grace.
Two Poems from an Ashram in India
First
All this talk of nectar and bliss is starting to annoy me.
I don't know about you, my friend,
but my path to God isn't sweet waft of incense.
It's a cat in a pigeon cage, and I'm the cat -
but also them who yell like hell when they get pinned.
My path to God is a worker's uprising,
won't be peace till they unionize.
Their protest is so fearsome
the National Guard won't go near them.
My path was beaten unconscious before me,
by a small brown man I had never seen,
who chased God through India, shin-deep in mud,
barefoot and famined, malarial blood,
sleeping in doorways, under bridges - a hobo.
(Which is short for "homeward bound," you know)
And he now chases me, saying: "Got it yet, Liz?
What HOMEWARD means? What BOUND really is?"
Second
However.
If they'd let me wear pants made out of the
fresh-mown grass from this place,
I'd do it.
If they'd let me make out
with every single Eucalyptus tree in Ganesh's Grove,
I swear, I'd do it.
I've sweated out dew these days,
worked out the dregs,
rubbed my chin on tree bark,
mistaking it for my master's leg.
I can't get far enough in.
If they'd let me eat the soil of this place
served on a bed of birds' nests,
I'd finish only half my plate,
Then sleep all night on the rest.
or
36 Tales about
the Pursuit of Balance
I've never had less of a plan in my life than I do upon arrival in Bali. I don't know where I'm going to live, I don't know what I'm going to do, I don't know what the exchange rate is, I don't know how to get a taxi at the airport - or even where to ask that taxi to take me. Nobody is expecting my arrival. I have no friends in Indonesia, or even friends-of-friends. And here's another problem: I'm actually not allowed to stay in Indonesia for four months, even if I want to. I find this out only upon entry into the country. It turns out I'm allowed only a one-month tourist visa.
As the nice immigration official is stamping my passport with permission to stay in Bali for only and exactly thirty days, I ask him in my most friendly manner if I can remain longer.
"No," he says, in his most friendly manner. The Balinese are famously friendly.
"You see, I'm supposed to stay here for three or four months," I tell him.
I don't mention that it's a prophecy - that my staying here for three or four months was predicted two years ago by an elderly and quite possibly demented Balinese medicine man, during a ten-minute palm-reading. I'm not sure how to explain this.
I haven't had any communication with the medicine man since that one evening. I wouldn't know how to contact him, anyway. What might his address be? "Medicine Man, On His Porch, Bali, Indonesia"? I don't know whether he's dead or alive. All I have for sure is his name - Ketut Liyer - and the memory that he lives in a village just outside the town of Ubud. But I don't remember the name of the village.
But Bali is a simple place to navigate. This is an island approximately the size of Delaware and it's a popular tourist destination. The Westerner with the credit cards can get around with ease. English is spoken here widely and happily. You can change your money at the airport, find a taxi with a nice driver who will suggest to you a lovely hotel. Everyone wants to help you.
So I take a taxi to the town of Ubud, which seems like a good place to start my journey. I check into a small and pretty hotel there. The hotel has a sweet swimming pool and a garden. The staff is Balinese, which means they automatically start adoring you and complimenting you on your beauty as soon as you walk in. The room has a view of the tropical treetops and there's a breakfast included every morning with piles of fresh tropical fruit. In short, it's one of the nicest places I've ever stayed and it's costing me less than ten dollars a day. It's good to be back.
Ubud is in the center of Bali, located in the mountains, surrounded by terraced rice paddies and innumerable Hindu temples, with rivers that run through deep canyons of jungle and volcanoes visible on the horizon. Ubud is the place where traditional Balinese painting, dance, carving, and religious ceremonies thrive. It isn't near any beaches, so the tourists who come to Ubud would prefer to see an ancient temple ceremony than to drink pina coladas in the surf. Regardless of what happens with my medicine man prophecy, this could be a lovely place to live for a while. Monkeys are walking around and Balinese families in traditional dress are all over the place.
By the time I unpack my bags it's still early afternoon, so I decide to take myself for a walk. And then I'll try to figure out how to start finding my medicine man. I'm not sure where to start with my search, so I stop at the front desk on my way out and ask Mario if he can help me.
Mario is one of the guys who work at this hotel. I already made friends with him when I checked in, largely on account of his name.
I had to ask, "Is your name really Mario? That doesn't sound very Indonesian."
"It's not my real name," he said. "My real name is Nyoman."
Ah - I could guess. In Bali there are only four names that the majority of the population give to their children, regardless of whether the baby is a boy or a girl. The names are Wayan (pronounced "Why-Ann"), Made ("mah- DAY"), Nyoman and Ketut. Translated, these names mean simply First, Second, Third and Fourth, and they mean birth order. If you have a fifth child, you start the name cycle all over again.
Understandably and necessarily, nicknaming is popular. For instance, somebody might be known as "Fat Made," or "Stupid-Ketut-Who-Burned-Down-His-Uncle's-House." My new Balinese friend Mario got around the problem by simply naming himself Mario.
"Why Mario?"
"Because I love everything Italian," he said.
When I told him that I'd recently spent four months in Italy, he found this fact so amazing that he came out from behind his desk and said, "Come, sit, talk." I came, I sat, we talked. And that's how we became friends.
So this afternoon I decide to start my search for my medicine man by asking my new friend Mario if by any chance he knows a man by the name of Ketut Liyer.
Mario frowns, thinking.
Then he says, "Ketut Liyer is famous healer."
"Yes! That's him!"
"I know him. I go in his house. Last week I take my cousin, she needs cure for her baby crying all night. Ketut Liyer fixes it."
I say, "Hey, Mario - do you think you could take me to visit Ketut Liyer someday? If you're not too busy?"
"Not now," he says.
Just as I'm starting to feel disappointed, he adds, "But maybe in five minutes?"
So the very afternoon I have arrived in Bali I got suddenly on the back of a motorbike, clutching my new friend Mario, who is speeding me through the rice terraces toward Ketut Liyer's home. I actually have no idea what I'm going to say to him when I arrive. And of course we don't have an appointment. I recognize the sign outside his door, the same as last time, saying: "Ketut Liyer-painter." It's a typical, traditional Balinese family compound. A high stone wall surrounds the entire property, there's a courtyard in the middle and a temple in the back. Several generations live out their lives together in the various interconnected small homes within these walls. We enter without knocking (there is no door, anyway), and there in the courtyard is Ketut Liyer the elderly medicine man, wearing his sarong and his shirt, looking precisely the same as he did two years ago when I first met him. Mario says something to Ketut, and Ketut turns his toothless smile upon me. This is so reassuring: I had remembered correctly, he is extraordinary. He shakes my hand with an excited and powerful grip.
"I am very happy to meet you," he says.
He has no idea who I am.
I remind him that I had been here to see him already, two years ago.
He looks puzzled. "Not first time in Bali?"
"No, sir."
He thinks hard.
I say, speaking slowly, "I was here two years ago with an American Yoga teacher, a woman who lived in Bali for many years."
He smiles. "I know Ann Barros!"
"That's right. Ann Barros is the Yoga teacher's name. But I'm Liz. I came here asking for your help once because I wanted to get closer to God. You drew me a magic picture."
"Don't remember," he says.
This is such bad news it's almost funny. So I describe the picture he had made for me, the figure with the four legs ("so grounded on earth") and the missing head ("not looking at the world through the intellect") and the face in the heart ("looking at the world through the heart") and he listens to me politely, with modest interest, like we're discussing somebody else's life entirely.
Then I say, "You told me I should come back here to Bali. You told me to stay here for three or four months. You said I could help you learn English and you would teach me the things that you know."
He listens to me politely, smiling.
Finally I say, "I'm the book writer, Ketut. I'm the book writer from New York."
And for some reason that works. Suddenly his face turns bright.
"YOU!" he says. "YOU! I remember YOU!" He leans forward, takes my shoulders in his hands and starts to shake me happily. "You came back! You came BACK!"
"I came back! I came back!" I say.
"You, you, you!"
"Me, me, me!"
"I so happy!" he says. We're holding hands and he's wildly excited now. "I do not remember you at first! So long ago we meet! You look different now! So different from two years! Last time, you very sad-looking woman. Now - so happy! Like different person!"
I say, "Do you still want me to help you with your English, Ketut?"
He tells me I can start helping him right now. He goes into his little house and comes back with a pile of letters he's received from abroad over the last few years (so he has an address!). He asks me to read the letters aloud to him; he can understand English well, but can't read much. I'm his secretary already. I'm a medicine man's secretary. This is wonderful.
When the letters are finished, he updates me on his life over the last few years. Some changes have occurred. Now he has a wife, for instance. He points across the courtyard at a big woman who's been standing in the shadow of her kitchen door, glaring at me like she's not sure if she should shoot me, or poison me first and then shoot me. Last time I was here, Ketut had sadly shown me photographs of his wife who had recently died - a beautiful old Balinese woman. I wave across the courtyard to the new wife, who backs away into her kitchen.
"Good woman," Ketut proclaims toward the kitchen shadows. "Very good woman."
He says that he's been very busy with his Balinese patients, always a lot to do. And then continues, "You come to my house every day to practice English with me now?" I nod happily and he says, "I will teach you Balinese meditation, OK?"
"OK," I say.
"I think three months enough time to teach you Balinese meditation, find God for you this way," he says. "Maybe four months. You like Bali?"
"I love Bali."
"You get married in Bali?"
"Not yet."
"I think maybe soon. You come back tomorrow?"
I promise to. So now it's time to go.
"I am very happy to meet you," he says, shaking my hand.
I offer up my first English lesson. I teach him the difference between "happy to meet you," and "happy to see you." I explain that we only say "Nice to meet you" the first time we meet somebody. After that, we say "Nice to see you," every time. Because you only meet someone once. But now we will see each other repeatedly, day after day.
He likes this. He says, "Nice to see you! I am happy to see you! I can see you! I am not deaf!"
This makes us all laugh, even Mario. We shake hands, and agree that I will come by again tomorrow afternoon.
Bali is a tiny Hindu island located in the middle of the two-thousand-mile-long Indonesian archipelago that constitutes the most populous Muslim nation on earth.
Balinese culture is one of the most methodical systems of social and religious organization on earth, a magnificent combination of tasks and roles and ceremonies. Religious ceremonies are of supreme importance here in Bali (an island, don't forget, with seven unpredictable volcanoes on it - you would pray, too). Life here is a constant cycle of offerings and rituals. You must perform them all, in correct order and with the correct intention, or the entire universe will fall out of balance.
The whole idea of Bali is a matrix, a massive and invisible grid of spirits, guides, paths and customs. Every Balinese knows exactly where he or she belongs, oriented within this great map. Just look at the four names of almost every Balinese citizen - First, Second, Third, Fourth - reminding them all of when they were born in the family, and where they belong. Mario, my new Italian-Indonesian friend, told me that he is only happy when he knows exactly where he is located at every moment, both in his relationship to the divine and to his family here on earth. If he loses that balance, he loses his power.
It's not an absurd hypothesis, therefore, to say that the Balinese are the global masters of balance. For me, on a personal search for balance, I had hoped to learn much from the Balinese about holding steady in this chaotic world. But the more I read and see about this culture, the more I realize how far off the grid of balance I've fallen, at least from the Balinese perspective.
So now I'm not so sure how much of the Balinese worldview I'm going to be able to incorporate into my own worldview. To me, balance means "equal freedom," or the equal possibility of falling in any direction at any given time, depending on... you know... how things go. The Balinese don't wait and see "how things go." That would be terrifying. They organize how things go, in order to keep things from falling apart.
When you are walking down the road in Bali and you pass a stranger, the very first question he or she will ask you is, "Where are you going?" The second question is, "Where are you coming from?" They're just trying to insert you into the grid for the purposes of security and comfort.
The third question a Balinese will almost certainly ask you is, "Are you married?" It's necessary for them to know this, to make sure that you are completely in order in your life. They really want you to say yes. If you're single, it's better not to say so directly. If you are a single woman traveling through Bali and somebody asks you, "Are you married?" the best possible answer is: "Not yet." This is a polite way of saying, "No," while indicating your optimistic intentions.
Even if you are eighty years old, or a lesbian, or a nun who has never been married and never intends to get married, the politest possible answer is still: "Not yet."
In the morning, Mario helped me buy a bicycle. I got a nice mountain bike, a helmet, a lock and a basket. Now I'm mobile though the roads are narrow and winding and badly maintained and crowded with motorcycles, trucks and tourist buses.
In the afternoon, I ride my bike down into Ketut's village. He's got guests when I arrive. It's a small family of rural Balinese who have brought their one-year-old daughter to Ketut for help. The poor little baby is teething and has been crying for several nights. Dad is a handsome young man in a sarong. Mom is pretty and shy. They have brought a tiny offering to Ketut for his services - 2,000 rupiah, which is about 25 cents, placed in a small handmade basket. There is one flower blossom in the basket, along with the money and a few grains of rice.
Ketut is relaxed and kind with his company. He listens to the parents explain their baby's troubles. Then he takes an ancient book filled with tiny writing in Balinese Sanskrit. He consults this book, then he takes a blank page from a notebook and writes what he tells me is "a prescription" for the little girl.
After writing the prescription, Ketut turns his back to us, fills a bowl with water, and says a mantra above it. Then Ketut blesses the baby with the water he has just infused with sacred power. After that Ketut takes the rest of the holy water and pours it into a small plastic sandwich bag, ties the bag at the top and gives it to the family to use later. The mother carries this plastic bag of water away with her as she leaves; it looks like she has just won a goldfish, only she forgot to take the goldfish with her.
Ketut Liyer has given this family about forty minutes of his undivided attention, for the fee of about twenty-five cents. He sometimes works for free, too; this is his duty as a healer. He may turn nobody away, or the gods will remove his talent for healing. Ketut gets about ten visitors a day like this, Balinese who need his help or advice on some holy or medical matter. On some days, when everyone wants a special blessing, he might have over one hundred visitors.
"Don't you get tired?"
"But this is my profession," he tells me. "This is my hobby - medicine man."
Later he gives me my first lesson in Balinese meditation. He tells me that there are many ways to find God but most are too complicated for Westerners, so he will teach me an easy meditation. Which goes, essentially, like this: sit in silence and smile. I love it. He's laughing even as he's teaching it to me. Sit and smile. Perfect.
"You study Yoga in India, Liss?" he asks.
"Yes, Ketut."
"You can do Yoga," he says, "but Yoga too hard." Here, he twists his body in a lotus position and makes a grave face. Then he breaks free and laughs, asking, "Why they always look so serious in Yoga? When you make serious face like this, you scare away good energy. To meditate, only you must smile. Smile with face, smile with mind, and good energy will come to you and clean away dirty energy. Even smile in your liver. Practice tonight at hotel. Not to hurry, not to try too hard. Too serious, you make you sick. You can call the good energy with a smile. All finish for today. See you later, alligator. Come back tomorrow. I am very happy to see you, Liss."
Here is Ketut Liyer's life story as he tells it:
"It is nine generations that my family is a medicine man. My father, my grandfather, my great-grandfather, all of them is a medicine man. They all wanted me to be medicine man because they saw I have light. But I did not want to be medicine man. Too much study! Too much information! And I didn't believe in medicine man! I wanted to be painter!
"When I was still young man, I met American man, very rich. He liked my painting. He wanted to buy big painting from me for lot of money. So I started to paint this picture for him. Every day I painting, painting, painting. Even in night I painting. Then, long time ago, no electric lightbulb, so I had lamp. Oil lamp, you understand? Pump lamp, have to pump it to make oil come. And I always make painting every night with oil lamp.
"One night, oil lamp is dark, so I pumping, pumping, pumping and it exploded! My arm was on fire! I went to hospital for one month with burned arm, it made infection. Infection went all the way to my heart. The doctor said I must to go to Singapore for cut off my arm, for amputation. I told doctor - first I must go home to my village.
"That night in village, I got dream. Father, grandfather, great-grandfather - all they came in my dream to my house together and told me how to heal my burned arm. They told me to make juice from saffron and sandalwood. Put this juice on burn. Then make powder from saffron and sandalwood. Rub this powder on burn. They told me I must do this, then I not lose my arm.
"I wake up. I don't know what to do, because sometimes dreams are just joking, you understand? But I put this saffron and sandalwood juice on my arm. And then I put this saffron and sandalwood powder on my arm. My arm very infected, very ache. But after juice and powder, became very cold. Start to feel better. In ten days, my arm is good. All heal.
"Because of that, I started to believe. Then I had dream again, with father, grandfather, great-grandfather. They told me now I must be medicine man. I must give my soul to God. To do this, I must make fast for six days, understand? No food, no water. No drink. Not easy. Only dew I had for six days. On number five day, I get unconscious. I see all gold color everywhere, even inside me. Very happy. I understand now. This gold color is God, also inside me. Same thing that is God is same thing inside me. Same-same.
"So then I must be medicine man. Then I learnt medical books from great-grandfather. These books not made on paper, made on palm leaves. Called lontars. This is Balinese medical encyclopedia. I learnt all different plants on Bali. Not easy. I learnt to take care of people with many problem.
"I still like to be artist, I like make painting when I have time, sell to gallery. Difficult for me to find time to make painting because of medicine man, but I must be medicine man. It is my profession. It is my hobby. Must help people or God is angry with me.
"I am in fourth caste in Bali, in very low caste like farmer. But I see many people in first caste not so intelligent as me. My name is Ketut Liyer. Liyer is name my grandfather gave me when I was little boy. It means 'bright light.' This is me."
I am so free here in Bali, it's almost ridiculous. The only thing I have to do every day is visit Ketut Liyer for a few hours in the afternoon. I meditate for an hour every morning using the Yogic techniques my Guru taught me, and then I meditate for an hour every evening with the practices Ketut has taught me ("sit still and smile"). In between, I walk around and ride my bike and sometimes talk to people and eat lunch. I found a quiet little library in this town, got myself a library card, and now great, delicious portions of my life are spent reading in the garden.
A few days ago, on the top of one lovely rise of forest I saw a sign: "Artist's House for Rent, with Kitchen." Because the universe is generous, three days later I am living there. Mario helped me move in, and all his friends at the hotel gave me a tearful farewell.
My new house is on a quiet road, surrounded in all directions by rice fields. It's a little cottage-like place inside ivy-covered walls. It's owned by an Englishwoman, but she is in London for the summer, so I replace her in this miraculous space. There is a bright red kitchen here, a pond full of goldfish, a marble terrace, an outdoor shower tiled in shiny mosaics. Little secret paths lead through a truly enchanting garden. The place comes with a gardener, so all I have to do is look at the flowers. The whole house is covered with vines; I feel like any day I will disappear with it and become a jungle flower myself. The rent is less than what I used to pay in New York City for taxi fare every month.
I'd been telling people since I first visited Bali two years ago that this small island was the world's only true utopia, a place that has known only peace and harmony and balance for all time. A perfect Eden with no history of violence or bloodshed ever. I'm not sure where I got this grand idea, but I spread it with full confidence.
"Even the policemen wear flowers in their hair," I said, as if that proved it.
In reality, though, it turns out Bali has had a history as bloody and violent as anywhere else on earth where people have ever lived.
Reading about this during my afternoons in the local library leaves me a bit confused. Wait - why did I come to Bali again? To search for the balance between worldly pleasure and spiritual devotion, right? Is this, indeed, the right location for such a search? Do the Balinese truly inhabit that peaceful balance, more than anyone else in the world? I mean, they look balanced, because of all the dancing and praying and feasting and beauty and smiling, but I don't know what's actually going on under there. The policemen really wear flowers tucked behind their ears, but there's corruption all over the place in Bali, just like in the rest of Indonesia (as I found out a few days ago when I passed a uniformed man a few hundred dollars to illegally extend my visa so I could stay in Bali for four months, after all). The Balinese quite literally depend on their peaceful image as a source of income, but how much of that is natural and how much of that is economically calculated?
So far, all I can say for certain is that I love the house I have rented and that the people in Bali have been gracious to me without exception. I find their art and ceremonies beautiful. That's my empirical experience of a place that is probably more complex than I will ever understand. But I'm here to work on my own equilibrium, and this still feels like a good climate in which to do that.
"Liss, will you practice Balinese meditation every night? Keep mind and heart clean?" asked Ketut one day.
"Every night," I promised.
"Will you learn to smile even in your liver?"
"Even in my liver, Ketut. Big smile in my liver."
"Good. This smile will make you beautiful woman. This will give you power to be very pretty. You can use this power to get what you want in life. Do you still practice Indian meditation, too?"
"Every morning."
"Good. Don't forget your Yoga. Good for you to keep practice both ways of meditation - Indian and Balinese. Both different, but good in equal way. Same-same. I think about religion, most of it is same-same."
"Not everybody thinks so, Ketut. Some people like to argue about God."
"Not necessary," he said. "I have good idea. If you meet some person from different religion and he want to make argument about God, you listen to everything this man say about God. Never argue about God with him. Best thing to say is, 'I agree with you.' Then you go home, pray what you want. This is my idea for people to have peace about religion."
Ketut eats only one meal a day - a typically simple Balinese dish of rice mixed with either duck or fish. He likes to drink one cup of coffee with sugar every day, mostly just to celebrate the fact that he can afford coffee and sugar. He keeps his body strong, he says, by meditating every night before sleep and by pulling the healthy energy of the universe into his core.
Ketut says that the human body is made of the five elements of all creation - water, fire, wind, sky and earth - and all you have to do is concentrate on this reality during meditation and you will receive energy from all of these sources and you will stay strong.
Until this evening, I still wasn't sure what my role was in Ketut Liyer's life. Every day I've been asking him if he's really sure he wants me around, and he keeps insisting that I must come and spend time with him. I feel guilty taking up so much of his day, but he always seems disappointed when I leave at the end of the afternoon. I'm not teaching him any English, not really. All I can do is to teach him to say, "Nice to see you," when I arrive, instead of "Nice to meet you."
Tonight, when his last patient had left and Ketut was exhausted, I asked him whether I should go now and let him have some privacy. But he replied, "I always have time for you." Then he asked me to tell him some stories about India, about America, about Italy, about my family. That's when I realized that I am not Ketut Liyer's English teacher, but I am the merest and simplest of pleasures for this old medicine man - I am his company. I'm somebody he can talk to because he enjoys hearing about the world and he hasn't had a chance to see it.
Ketut has never been off the island of Bali in his life. He has spent very little time, actually, off this porch. He goes to the temples for the big important ceremonies and he is invited to his neighbors' homes to perform some rituals, but most of the time he can be found right here, cross-legged upon this bamboo mat, surrounded by his great-grandfather's palm-leaf medical encyclopedias, taking care of people and occasionally treating himself to a cup of coffee with sugar.
As for Ketut's wife, it takes me a while to get along with her. Nyomo, as he calls her, is big and plump with a limp. Her toes are painfully crooked from arthritis. She was obviously suspicious of me at first - Who is this flamingo walking through my house every day?
But then something changed. It was after the photocopy incident.
Ketut Liyer has piles of old, lined notebooks, filled with tiny little handwriting, of ancient Balinese-Sanskrit mysteries about healing. He copied these notes into these notebooks in the 1940s or 1950s, sometime after his grandfather died. This stuff is invaluable. There are volumes of data about rare trees and leaves and plants and all their medicinal properties. He's got about sixty pages of diagrams about palm-reading, and more notebooks full of astrological data, mantras, spells and cures. The only problem is, these notebooks are in bad condition. They look like piles of autumn leaves. Every time he turns a page, he rips it.
So I asked if I could take a notebook into town with me and photocopy it. I had to explain what photocopying was, and promise that I would only keep the notebook for twenty- four hours and that I would do it no harm. Finally, he agreed to let me take it off the porch property. I rode into town to the shop with the Internet computers and photocopiers and I delicately duplicated every page, then had the new, clean photocopies bound in a nice plastic folder. I brought the old and the new versions of the book back the next day before noon. Ketut was astonished and delighted, so happy because he's had that notebook, he said, for fifty years.
I asked if I could copy the rest of his notebooks, to keep that information safe, too. And by the end of the week, I'd photocopied several of the old manuscripts. Every day, Ketut called his wife over and showed her the new copies and he was overjoyed. Her facial expression didn't change at all, but she studied the evidence thoroughly.
And the next Monday when I came to visit, Nyomo brought me hot coffee, served in a jelly jar. The next day she brought me a glass of coffee and a bowl of sugar on the side. And the next day it was a glass of coffee, a bowl of sugar and a cold boiled potato. Every day that week, she added a new treat.
Then, yesterday, I was standing in the courtyard, saying my good-byes to Ketut, and Nyomo came shuffling past with her broom, sweeping and pretending not to be paying attention to everything that happens in her empire. I had my hands clasped behind my back as I was standing there, and she came up behind me and took one of my hands in hers. Then she gave me this deep, long squeeze. I could feel her love pulsing through her power grip, right up into my heart. Then she dropped my hand and limped away, saying not a single word, continuing her sweeping as though nothing had happened. While I stood there quietly drowning in happiness.
I have a new friend. His name is Yudhi, which is pronounced "You-Day." He's Indonesian, originally from Java. I got to know him because he rented my house to me; he's working for the Englishwoman who owns the place, looking after her property while she's away in London for the summer. Yudhi is twenty-seven years old and stocky in build. He's got a smile that could stop crime, and he's got a long, complicated life story for somebody so young.
He was born in Jakarta; his mother was a housewife, his father an Indonesian fan of Elvis who owned a small air-conditioning and refrigeration business. The family was Christian - a strange thing in this part of the world, and Yudhi says that he was mocked by the neighborhood Muslim kids as "You eat pork!" and "You love Jesus!" Yudhi wasn't bothered by the teasing; Yudhi, by nature, isn't bothered by much.
The guy has a musical ear like maybe nobody I've ever met. He's beautiful with the guitar, never had lessons but understands melody and harmony really well. He makes these East-West blends of music that combine classical Indonesian lullabies with reggae and early-days Stevie Wonder funk - it's hard to explain, but he should be famous. I never knew anybody who heard Yudhi's music who didn't think he should be famous.
Here's what he always wanted to do most of all - live in America and work in show business. So when Yudhi was still a Javanese teenager, he somehow talked himself into a job (speaking hardly any English yet) on a Carnival Cruise Lines ship.
The first time the cruise ship sailed into New York Harbor, Yudhi stayed up all night, watching the city skyline appear over the horizon, and his heart was hammering with excitement. Hours later, he got off the ship in New York and hailed a yellow cab. When the recent African immigrant driving the taxi asked where he'd like to go, Yudhi said, "Anywhere, man - just drive me around. I want to see everything." A few months later the ship came to New York City again, and this time Yudhi disembarked for good. His contract was up with the cruise line and he wanted to live in America now.
He ended up in suburban New Jersey, living for a while with an Indonesian man he'd met on the ship. He got a job in a sandwich shop. Somehow (again - that smile) he met up in New York City with a crowd of young musicians from all over the world and he started playing guitar with them. And at one of the jam sessions, he met Ann - a pretty blonde from Connecticut who played bass. They fell in love. They got married. They found an apartment in Brooklyn and they were surrounded by wonderful friends. Life was just unbelievably happy. His English was quickly perfect. He was thinking about going to college.
On September 11, Yudhi watched the towers fall from his rooftop in Brooklyn. Like everyone else he was paralyzed with grief. I don't know how much attention Yudhi was paying when the U.S. Congress passed the Patriot Act in response to the terrorist threat, which included new immigration laws, directed against Islamic nations such as Indonesia. It was demanded that all Indonesian citizens living in America register with the Department of Homeland Security. Yudhi decided that he wanted to register. He was married to an American and he wanted to update his immigration status and become a legal citizen. He didn't want to live in hiding.
He and Ann consulted all kinds of lawyers, but nobody knew how to advise them. "The laws haven't been tested yet," said the immigration lawyers. "The laws will be tested on you." So Yudhi and his wife had a meeting with a nice immigration official and shared their story. The couple were told that Yudhi was to come back later that same afternoon, for "a second interview." Yudhi was strictly instructed to return without his wife, without a lawyer, and carrying nothing in his pockets. Hoping for the best, he returned alone and empty-handed to the second interview - and that's when they arrested him.
They took him to a detention center in Elizabeth, New Jersey, where he stayed for weeks amongst a vast crowd of immigrants, many of whom had been living and working in America for years. After a period of detention, the U.S. government sent my Christian friend Yudhi - now an Islamic terrorist suspect, apparently - back to Indonesia. I don't know if he's ever going to be allowed anywhere near America again. He and his wife are still trying to figure out what to do with their lives now; they didn't want to live the rest of their lives in Indonesia.
Yudhi came to Bali to see if he could make a living here, though it's difficult for him to be accepted into this society because he isn't Balinese - he's from Java. And the Balinese don't like the Javanese, thinking of them all as thieves and beggars. So Yudhi doesn't know what to do next. Maybe his wife, Ann, will come and join him here. But maybe not. What's here for her? Their young marriage, conducted now entirely by e-mail, is on the rocks. He's so disoriented here. He's more of an American than he is anything else; Yudhi and I use the same slang, we talk about our favorite restaurants in New York and we like all the same movies. He comes over to my house in the evenings and I get him beers and he plays me the most amazing songs on his guitar. I wish he were famous. If there was any fairness, he would be so famous by now.
He says, "Why is life all crazy like this?"
"Ketut, why is life all crazy like this?" I asked my medicine man the next day.
He replied, "Bhuta ia, dewa ia. "
"What does that mean?"
"Man is a demon, man is a god. Both true."
This was a familiar idea to me. It's very Indian, very Yogic. The notion is that human beings are born, as my Guru has explained many times, with the equivalent potential for both contraction and expansion. The ingredients of both darkness and light are equally present in all of us, and then it's up to the individual (or the family, or the society) to decide what will be brought forth - the good or the evil. The madness of this planet is a result of the human being's difficulty in coming into virtuous balance with himself.
"So what can we do about the craziness of the world?"
"Nothing." Ketut laughed, but with a dose of kindness. "This is nature of world. This is destiny. Worry about your craziness only - make you in peace."
"But how should we find peace within ourselves?" I asked Ketut.
"Meditation," he said. "Purpose of meditation is only happiness and peace - very easy. Today I will teach a new meditation, make you even better person. It is called Four Brothers Meditation."
Ketut went on to explain that the Balinese believe we are each accompanied at birth by four invisible brothers, who come into the world with us and protect us throughout our lives. The brothers inhabit the four virtues a person needs in order to be safe and happy in life: intelligence, friendship, strength and (I love this one) poetry. The brothers can be called upon in any critical situation for rescue and assistance. When you die, your four spirit brothers collect your soul and bring you to heaven.
Today Ketut told me that he's never taught any Westerner the Four Brothers Meditation yet, but he thinks I am ready for it. First, he taught me the names of my invisible siblings - Ango Patih, Maragio Patih, Banus Patih and Banus Patih Ragio. He instructed me to memorize these names and to ask for the help of my brothers throughout my life, whenever I need them. He tells me to say their names as I'm washing myself in the morning, and they will join me. Say their names again every time before I eat, and I will include my brothers in the enjoyment of the meal. Call on them before I go to sleep, saying, "I am sleeping now, so you must stay awake and protect me," and my brothers will shield me through the night, stop demons and nightmares.
Ketut then instructed me that whenever I speak to my four spirit brothers, I must tell them who I am, so they can recognize me. I must use the secret nickname they have for me. I must say, "I am Lagoh Prano."
Lagoh Prano means "Happy Body."
I rode my bicycle back home, pushing my happy body up the hills toward my house in the late afternoon sun. On my way through the forest, a big male monkey dropped out of a tree right in front of me. I was not frightened. I said, "Back off, Jack - I got four brothers protecting my ass," and rode on by him.
Although the next day (in spite of my protective brothers) I got hit by a bus. It knocked me off my bicycle and I got tossed into a cement irrigation ditch. The worst of the damage was a deep cut on my knee, full of bits of pebbles and dirt, that proceeded - over the next few days in the moist tropical air - to become infected.
I didn't want to worry Ketut, but a few days later I finally showed my wound to the old medicine man. He looked at it, concerned.
"Infect," he diagnosed. "Painful."
"Yes," I said.
"You should go see doctor."
This was a little surprising. Wasn't he the doctor? But for some reason he didn't offer to help. Maybe Ketut just had a secret hidden plan, because it was my banged-up knee that allowed me, in the end, to meet Wayan. And from that meeting, everything that was meant to happen... happened
Wayan Nuriyasih is, like Ketut Liyer, a Balinese healer. There are some differences between them, though. He's elderly and male; she's a woman in her late thirties. He's more of a priestly figure, somewhat more mystical, while Wayan is a hands-on doctor, mixing herbs and medications in her own shop and taking care of patients right there on the premises.
Wayan has a little storefront shop in the center of Ubud called 'Traditional Balinese Healing Center.' I'd ridden my bike past it many times on my way down to Ketut's, noticing it because of all the potted plants outside the place, and because of the blackboard with the curious handwritten advertisement for the 'Multivitamin Lunch Special.' But I'd never gone into the place before my knee got messed up. After Ketut sent me to find a doctor, though, I remembered the shop and came by on my bicycle, hoping somebody there might be able to help me deal with the infection.
Wayan's place is a very small medical clinic and home and restaurant all at the same time. Downstairs there's a tiny kitchen and a modest public eating area with three tables and few chairs. Upstairs there's a private area where Wayan gives massages and treatments. There's one dark bedroom in the back.
I limped into the shop with my sore knee and introduced myself to Wayan the healer - a strikingly attractive Balinese woman with a wide smile and shiny black hair down to her waist. There were two shy young girls hiding behind her in the kitchen who smiled when I waved to them. I showed Wayan my infected wound and asked if she could help. Soon Wayan had water and herbs boiling up on the stove. She placed hot green leaves on my knee and it started to feel better immediately.
We started talking. Her English was excellent. Because she is Balinese, she immediately asked me the three standard introductory questions - Where are you going today? Where are you coming from? Are you married?
When I told her I wasn't married ("Not yet!") she looked surprised.
"Never been married?" she asked.
"No," I lied. I don't like lying, but I generally have found it's easier not to mention divorce to the Balinese because they get so upset about it.
"Really never been married?" she asked again, and she was looking at me with great curiosity now. "Not even once?" she asked.
OK, so she can see through me.
"Well," I confessed, "there was that one time..."
And her face cleared like: Yes, I thought as much. She asked, "Divorced?"
"Yes," I said, ashamed now. "Divorced."
"I could tell you are divorced."
"It's not very common here, is it?"
"But me, too," said Wayan, entirely to my surprise. "Me too, divorced."
"You?"
"I did everything I could," she said. "I try everything before I got a divorce, praying every day. But I had to go away from him."
I stayed there in Wayan's shop for the next five hours, talking with my new best friend about her troubles. She cleaned up the infection in my knee as I listened to her story. Wayan's Balinese husband, she told me, was a man who "drink all the time, always gamble, lose all our money, then beat me when I don't give him more money to gamble and to drink." She said, "He beat me into the hospital many times. I think if I was not healer, I would lose my ears, you know, not be able to hear things anymore. Or maybe lose my eye, not be able to see." She left him, she told me, after he beat her so severely "that I lose my baby, my second child, the one in my belly." After which incident their firstborn child, a bright little girl with the nickname of Tutti, said, "I think you should get a divorce, Mommy. Every time you go to the hospital you leave too much work around the house for Tutti."
Tutti was four years old when she said this.
To exit a marriage in Bali leaves a person alone and unprotected in ways that are almost impossible for a Westerner to imagine. The Balinese family unit, enclosed within the walls of a family compound, is merely everything - four generations of siblings, cousins, parents, grandparents and children all living together in small bungalows surrounding the family temple, taking care of each other from birth to death. The family compound is the source of strength, financial security, health care, education and - most important to the Balinese - spiritual connection.
Wayan's choice was either to stay in the family compound safety net with a husband who kept putting her in the hospital, or to save her own life and leave, which left her with nothing.
Bali is a patriarchy to the end. In the rare case of a divorce, the children automatically belong to the father. To get Tutti back, Wayan had to hire a lawyer, whom she paid with every single thing she had. But she got her daughter back, in the end, after a two-year battle.
For the last few years now, Wayan and Tutti have been living on their own, moving from place to place every few months as money comes and goes, always sleepless with worry about where to go next. Which has been difficult because every time she moves, her patients have trouble finding her again. Also, with every move, little Tutti has to be pulled out of school.
In the middle of Wayan's telling me this story, Tutti herself came into the shop. She had just arrived home from school. She's eight years old now. The girl is very energetic and charming. She asked me in lively English if I'd like to eat lunch, and Wayan said, "I forgot! You should have lunch!" and the mother and daughter rushed into their kitchen and - with the help of the two shy young girls - produced sometime later the best food I'd tasted yet in Bali.
Little Tutti brought out each course of the meal with a bright-voiced explanation of what was on the plate.
"Seaweed, for calcium!" she announced.
"Tomato salad, for vitamin D!"
"Mixed herbs, for not get malaria!"
I finally said, "Tutti, where did you learn to speak such good English?"
"From a book!" she proclaimed.
Balinese kids are usually all quiet and polite, hiding behind their mother's skirts. Not Tutti.
"She wants to be an animal doctor," Wayan told me. "What is the word in English?"
"Veterinarian?"
"Yes. Veterinarian. But she has many questions about animals, I don't know how to answer. I hope she can go to university."
I'd been in their shop now for hours and felt I should leave. "I will come back tomorrow," I promised Wayan, "and I'll order the multivitamin lunch special again."
"Your knee is better now," Wayan said. "Quickly better. No infection anymore."
She wiped the last of the green herbal goo off my leg, then moved my kneecap around a bit, feeling for something. Then she felt the other knee, closing her eyes. She opened her eyes, grinned and said, "I can tell by your knees that you don't have much sex lately."
I said, "Why?"
"It's the cartilage. Very dry. Hormones from sex lubricate the joints. You need a good man. I will find one for you. I will pray at the temple for a good man for you, because now you are my sister. Also, if you come back tomorrow, I will clean your kidneys for you."
"A good man and clean kidneys, too? That sounds like a great deal."
"I never tell anybody these things before about my divorce," she told me. "But my life is heavy, too much sad, too much hard. I don't understand why life is so hard."
Then I did a strange thing. I took both the healer's hands in mine and I said with the most powerful conviction, "The hardest part of your life is behind you now, Wayan."
I left the shop, then, trembling with some potent intuition or impulse that I could not yet identify or release.
Now my days are divided into natural thirds. I spend my mornings with Wayan at her shop, laughing and eating. I spend my afternoons with Ketut the medicine man, talking and drinking coffee. I spend my evenings in my lovely garden, either reading a book, or sometimes talking with Yudhi, who comes over to play his guitar. Every morning, I meditate while the sun comes up over the rice fields, and before bedtime I speak to my four spirit brothers and ask them to watch over me while I sleep.
I've been here only a few weeks and I feel satisfaction already. The task in Indonesia was to search for balance, but I'm not searching for anything anymore because the balance has naturally come into place. I can feel my own peace, and I love the swing of my days between easeful devotional practices and the pleasures of beautiful landscape, dear friends and good food. I have never felt less burdened by myself or by the world.
I remember one of my Guru's teachings about happiness. She says that people think that happiness is a stroke of hick. But that's not how happiness works. Happiness is the consequence of personal effort. You fight for it, insist upon it, and sometimes even travel around the world looking for it. And once you have achieved a state of happiness, you must make a mighty effort to stay afloat on top of it.
Recalling these teachings as I ride my bike so freely in the sunset through Bali, I keep making prayers, saying, "This is what I would like to hold on to. Please help me memorize this feeling of contentment and help me always support it."
Ketut - one of the happiest humans I've ever encountered - is giving me the freedom to ask any questions about divinity, about human nature. A few days ago the medicine man told me that he knows sixteen different meditation techniques. For instance, he said, he knows one meditation that takes him "to up."
"To up?" I asked. "What is to up?"
"To seven levels up," he said. "To heaven."
Hearing the familiar idea of "seven levels," I asked him if he meant that his meditation took him up through the seven sacred chakras of the body, which are discussed in Yoga.
"Not chakras," he said. "Places. This meditation takes me seven places in universe. Up and up. Last place I go is heaven."
I asked, "Have you been to heaven, Ketut?"
He smiled. Of course he had been there, he said. Easy to go to heaven.
"What is it like?"
"Beautiful. Everything beautiful is there. Every person beautiful is there. Everything beautiful to eat is there. Everything is love there. Heaven is love."
Then Ketut said he knows another meditation. "To down." This down meditation takes him seven levels below the world. This is a more dangerous meditation. Not for beginning people, only for a master.
I asked, "So if you go up to heaven in the first meditation, then, in the second meditation you must go down to...?"
"Hell," he finished the statement.
This was interesting. Heaven and hell aren't ideas I've heard discussed very much in Hinduism.
But Ketut was talking about heaven and hell in a different way, as if they are real places in the universe which he has actually visited. At least I think that's what he meant.
Trying to get clear on this, I asked, "You have been to hell, Ketut?"
He smiled. Of course he's been there.
"What's it like in hell?"
"Same like heaven," he said.
He saw my confusion and tried to explain. "Universe is a circle, Liss."
I still wasn't sure I understood.
He said, "To up, to down - all same, at end."
I asked, "Then how can you tell the difference between heaven and hell?"
"Because of how you go. Heaven, you go up, through seven happy places. Hell, you go down, through seven sad places. This is why it better for you to go up, Liss." He laughed.
I asked, "You mean, you might spend your life going upward, through the happy places, since heaven and hell - the destinations - are the same thing anyway?"
"Same-same," he said. "Same in end, so better to be happy on journey."
I said, "So, if heaven is love, then hell is..."
"Love, too," he said.
I sat with that one for a while, trying to make the math work.
Ketut laughed again, slapped my knee affectionately with his hand.
"Always so difficult for young person to understand this!"
So I was in Wayan's shop again this morning.
As we're talking, little Tutti is sitting on the floor, drawing a picture of a house. Mostly, houses are what Tutti draws these days. She's dying to have a house of her own. There's always a rainbow in the background of her pictures, and a smiling family - father and all.
Wayan keeps telling me she's been going to the temple every evening and praying for a good man to show up in my life, to be my lover.
"Everybody need sex, Liz," she says.
At this moment, a great-looking woman came into the shop, smiling. Tutti ran into her arms, shouting, "Armenia! Armenia! Armenia!" Which, as it turned out, was the woman's name. I introduced myself to Armenia, and she told me she was from Brazil. She was so dynamic, this woman - so Brazilian. She was gorgeous, elegantly dressed, charismatic and just insistently sexy.
Armenia, too, is a friend of Wayan's, who comes to the shop frequently for lunch and for various traditional medical and beauty treatments. She sat down and talked with us for about an hour. She's in Bali for only a week before she has to fly off to Africa, or maybe it's back to Thailand, to take care of her business. Armenia used to work for the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees. Now she runs a multinational marketing business called Novica, which supports artists all over the world by selling their products on the Internet. She speaks about seven or eight languages. She's got the most fabulous pair of shoes I've seen since Rome.
Looking at us both, Wayan said, "Liz - why do you never try to look sexy, like Armenia? You such a pretty girl, you have nice face, nice body, nice smile. But always you wear this same T-shirt, same jeans. Don't you want to be sexy, like her?"
"Wayan," I said, "Armenia is Brazilian. It's a completely different situation."
"How is it different?"
"Armenia," I said, turning to my new friend. "Can you please try to explain to Wayan what it means to be a Brazilian woman?"
Armenia laughed, but then considered the question seriously and answered, "Well, I always tried to look nice and be feminine even in the war zones and refugee camps of Central America. Even in the worst tragedies and crisis, there's no reason to add to everyone's misery by looking miserable yourself. That's my philosophy. This is why I always wore makeup and jewelry into the jungle - nothing too extravagant, but maybe just a nice gold bracelet and some earrings, a little lipstick, good perfume. Just enough to show that I still had my self-respect."
Armenia couldn't stay for too long at Wayan's shop because she had work to do, but that didn't stop her from inviting me to a party tonight. She knows another Brazilian guy in Ubud, she told me, and he's hosting a special event at a nice restaurant this evening. He'll be cooking a feijoada - a traditional Brazilian feast consisting of massive piles of pork and black beans. There will be Brazilian cocktails, as well. Lots of interesting expatriates from all over the world who live here in Bali. Would I like to come? They might all go out dancing later, too. She doesn't know if I like parties, but...
Cocktails? Dancing? Piles of pork?
Of course I'll come.
I can't remember the last time I got dressed up, but this evening I dug out my one fancy spaghetti-strap dress from the bottom of my backpack and put it on. I even wore lipstick. I can't remember the last time I wore lipstick, but I know it wasn't anywhere near India. I stopped at Armenia's house on the way over to the party, and she gave me some of her fancy jewelry, let me borrow her fancy perfume, let me store my bicycle in her backyard so I could arrive at the party in her fancy car, like a proper adult woman.
The dinner with the expatriates was great fun. I even got a little bit drunk, which was notable after all the purity of my last few months of praying at the Ashram and sipping tea in my Balinese flower garden. And I was flirting! Though I couldn't really tell who I was flirting with. Was I attracted to the witty Australian former journalist sitting next to me? Or was it the quiet intellectual German down the table? Or was it the handsome older Brazilian man who had cooked this giant feast for all of us in the first place? (I liked his kind brown eyes and his accent. And his cooking, of course. I said something very provocative to him, out of nowhere. He was making a joke, saying, "I'm a full catastrophe of a Brazilian man - I can't dance, I can't play soccer and I can't play any musical instruments." For some reason I replied, "Maybe so. But I have a feeling you could play a very good Casanova." Time suddenly stopped for a long, long moment, then, as we looked at each other frankly, like, That was an interesting idea. He didn't deny it. I looked away first, feeling myself blush.)
Then we went out dancing at a local nightclub. There was a live band of Balinese kids playing good reggae music. Armenia hadn't come along, claiming she had to work the next day, but the handsome older Brazilian man was my host. He wasn't such a bad dancer as he claimed. Probably he can play soccer, too. I liked having him nearby, opening doors for me, complimenting me, calling me "darling."
It had been so long since I'd been in a bar. I think the last time I'd gone dancing was back when I was married... back when I was happily married. On the dance floor I ran into my friend Stefania, a lively young Italian girl I'd met recently in a meditation class in Ubud, and we danced together. Sometime after midnight, the band stopped playing.
That's when I met the guy named Ian. Oh, I really liked this guy. Right away I really liked him. He was very good-looking. He was smart, asked questions, spoke to my friend Stefania in the same primitive Italian that I speak. It turned out that he was the drummer in this reggae band. Somehow we started laughing and talking.
Felipe came over then - that was the Brazilian's name, Felipe. He invited us all to go out to a local restaurant owned by European expatriates, a place that never closes, he promised, where beer and other drinks are served at all hours. I found myself looking to Ian (did he want to go?) and when he said yes, I said yes, also. So we all went to the restaurant and I sat with Ian and we talked and joked all night, and, oh, I really liked this guy. He was the first man I'd met in a long while who I really liked in that way, as they say. He was a few years older than me, had led a most interesting life. He'd started his career in the British Army in Northern Ireland, then built refugee camps in Bosnia, was now taking a break in Bali to work on music...
I could not believe I was still up at 3:30 AM, and not to meditate, either! I was up in the middle of the night and wearing a dress and talking to an attractive man. How terribly radical. At the end of the evening, Ian and I admitted to each other how nice it had been to meet. He asked if I had a phone number and I told him I didn't, but that I did have e-mail, and he said, "Yeah, but e-mail just feels so... ech..." So at the end of the night we didn't exchange anything but a hug. He said, "We'll see each other again when they" - pointing to the gods up in the sky - "say so."
Just before dawn, Felipe offered me a ride home. As we rode up the twisting back roads he said, "Darling, you've been talking to the biggest lier in Ubud all night long."
My heart sank.
"Is Ian really a lier?" I asked. "Tell me the truth now and save me the trouble later."
"Ian?" said Felipe. He laughed. "No, darling! Ian is a serious guy. He's a good man. I meant myself. I'm the biggest lier in Ubud."
We rode along in silence for a while.
"You like Ian, don't you?" he asked.
"I don't know," I said. My head wasn't clear. I'd been drinking too many Brazilian cocktails. "He's attractive, intelligent. It's been a long time since I thought about liking anybody."
"You're going to have a wonderful few months here in Bali. You wait and see."
"But I don't know how much more socializing I can do, Felipe. I only have the one dress. People will start to notice that I'm wearing the same thing all the time."
"You're young and beautiful, darling. You only need the one dress."
Am I young and beautiful?
I thought I was old and divorced.
I can barely sleep at all this night, so unaccustomed to these odd hours, the dance music still thrumming in my head, my hair smelling of cigarettes, my stomach protesting the alcohol. I doze a bit, then wake as the sun comes up, just as I am accustomed to. Only this morning I am not rested and I am not at peace and I'm in no condition for meditation. Why am I so agitated? I had a nice night, didn't I? I met some interesting people, I dressed up and danced, flirted with some men...
The agitation increases at the thought of that word, turning into panic. I don't know how to do this anymore. I am feeling only panic and uncertainty. I start imagining myself getting involved with Ian who hadn't even given me an e-mail address. I can see all the way into our future already, including the arguments over his smoking habit. Then I start to miss David more than I have in months, thinking, Maybe I should call him and see if he wants to try getting together again... It's never a far leap from thinking about David to obsessing about the circumstances of my divorce, and so soon I start brooding (just like old times) about my ex-husband, my divorce...
And then I start thinking about Felipe, for some reason that handsome older Brazilian man. He's nice. Felipe.
He says I am young and beautiful and that I will have a wonderful time here in Bali. He's right, right? I should relax and have some fun, right? But this morning it doesn't feel fun.
I don't know how to do this anymore.
"What is this life? Do you understand? I don't."
This was Wayan talking.
She had just learned that the lease on her shop was going to come up at the end of August - only three months from now - and that her rent would be raised. She would probably have to move again because she couldn't afford to stay here. She only had about fifty dollars in the bank, and no idea where to go. Moving would take Tutti out of school again. They needed a home - a real home. This is no way for a Balinese person to live.
Here are the facts: Single mom, talented child, poor business, virtual homelessness. Where will she go? She can't live with the ex-husband's family, obviously. Wayan's own family are rice farmers in the countryside and poor. If she goes and lives with them, it's the end of her business as a healer in town because her patients won't be able to reach her and you can forget about Tutti getting enough education to go someday to Animal Doctor College.
I learnt something about those two shy girls I noticed on the first day. It turns out that these are a pair of orphans Wayan has adopted. They are both named Ketut and we call them Big Ketut and Little Ketut. Wayan found the Ketuts starving and begging in the marketplace a few months ago. They were abandoned there by a woman who deposit parentless children in various marketplaces across Bali to beg for money, then pick the kids up every night in a van, collecting their money and giving them a place somewhere to sleep. When Wayan first found Big and Little Ketut, they hadn't eaten for days, had lice and parasites. She thinks the younger one is maybe ten and the older one might be thirteen, but they don't know their own ages or even their last names. Wayan has taken them in and cares for them as lovingly as she does her own Tutti. She and the three children all sleep on the same mattress in the one bedroom behind the shop.
I want to help them.
Today as Wayan and Armenia and I were eating our lunch, I looked over at little Tutti and noticed that she was doing something rather odd. She was walking around the shop with a single, small square of pretty cobalt blue ceramic tile resting on the palms of her upturned hands, singing in a chanting sort of way. I asked Wayan what this was all about. She said that Tutti had found the tile outside the construction site of a fancy hotel project down the road and had pocketed it. Ever since Tutti had found the tile, she kept saying to her mother, "Maybe if we have a house someday, it can have a pretty blue floor, like this." Now, according to Wayan, Tutti often likes to sit on that tiny blue square for hours, shutting her eyes and pretending she's inside her own house. What can I say? When I heard that story, and looked at that child deep in meditation upon her small blue tile, I thought, "That's enough."
And I excused myself from the shop to go take care of this intolerable state of affairs.
I came to Ubud's local Internet cafe, where I sat and wrote a fund-raising e-mail to all my friends and family across the world.
I told everyone that my birthday was coming up in July and that soon I would be thirty-five. I told them that there was nothing in this world that I needed or wanted, and that I had never been happier in my life. I told them that, if I were home in New York, I would be planning a big stupid birthday party and I would make them all come to this party, and they would have to buy me gifts and bottles of wine and the whole celebration would get ridiculously expensive. Therefore, I explained, a cheaper and more lovely way to help celebrate this birthday would be if my friends and family made a donation to help a woman named Wayan Nuriyasih buy a house in Indonesia for herself and her children.
Then I told the whole story of Wayan and Tutti and the orphans and their situation.
I won't go through the entire drama of the week, or try to explain what it feels like to open e-mails every day from all over the world that all say, "Count me in!" Everyone gave. Seven days later my friends and my family and a bunch of strangers all over the world helped me get almost $ 18,000 to buy Wayan Nuriyasih a home of her own.
I knew that it was Tutti who had manifested this miracle, thanks to her prayers.
One last thing. I'm embarrassed to admit that it was my friend Bob, not me, who noticed that the word "Tutti" in Italian means "Everybody." Bob wrote an e-mail last week, saying, "So that's the final lesson, isn't it? When you set out in the world to help yourself, you inevitably help... Tutti."
I don't want to tell Wayan about it, not until all the money has been raised. So for the whole week, I keep my mouth shut about my plans, and I keep myself occupied having dinner almost every night with Felipe the Brazilian.
I guess I have a crush on him.
He's fifty-two years old. He's got silver hair. His eyes are warm and brown. He has a gentle face and he smells wonderful. And he is an actual grown man.
He's been living in Bali for about five years now, working with Balinese silversmiths to make jewelry for export to America. I like the fact that he was faithfully married for almost twenty years before his marriage broke down for its own reasons. I like the fact that he has already raised children, and that he raised them well, and that they love him. I like that he was the parent who stayed home with his children when they were little, while his Australian wife made her career. I like the fact that Felipe speaks four, maybe more, languages fluently. I like that he's traveled through over fifty countries in his life, and that he sees the world as a small and easily managed place. I like the way he listens to me.
He said to me the other night, "Why don't you take a lover while you're in Bali, Liz?"
"I don't think I'm ready for it," I told him. "I don't want to go through all the effort of romance again, you know? I don't want to show my body to a new lover. And I don't want to tell my life story all over again, or worry about birth control. Anyway, I'm not even sure I know how to do it anymore. I think I was more confident about sex and romance when I was sixteen than I am now."
"Of course you were," Felipe said. "You were young and stupid then. Only the young and stupid are confident about sex and romance."
We talk about our marriages, our divorces. We compare notes about the bottomless depths of post-divorce depression. We drink wine and eat well together and we tell each other the nicest stories we can remember about former spouses, just to take the sting out of all that conversation about loss.
He says, "Do you want to do something with me this weekend?" and I find myself saying yes, that would be nice. Because it would be nice.
I let him hold me for a while. I can feel him press his face into my hair, as my face presses somewhere against his chest. I can smell his shirt. I really like the way he smells. When I let him hold me at the end of the evening, I let myself be held.
Which hasn't happened for a long time.
I asked Ketut, my old medicine man, "What do you know about romance?"
He said, "What is this, romance?"
"Romance," I defined. "Women and men in love. Kissing and sex and marriage - all that stuff."
"I not make sex with too many people in my life, Liss. Only with my wife."
"You're right - that's not too many people. But do you mean your first wife or your second wife?"
"I only have one wife, Liss. She dead now."
"What about Nyomo?"
"Nyomo not really my wife, Liss. She the wife of my brother." Seeing my confused expression, he added, "This typical Bali," and explained. Ketut's older brother, who is a rice farmer, lives next door to Ketut and is married to Nyomo. They had three children together. Ketut and his wife, on the other hand, were unable to have any children at all, so they adopted one of Ketut's brother's sons in order to have an heir. When Ketut's wife died, Nyomo began living in both family compounds, splitting her time between the two households, taking care of both her husband and his brother, and tending to the two families of her children. She is in every way a wife to Ketut in the Balinese manner (cooking, cleaning, taking care of household religious ceremonies and rituals) except that they don't have sex together.
"Why not?" I asked.
"Too OLD!" he said. Then he called Nyomo over, to let her know that the American lady wants to know why they don't have sex with each other. Nyomo was laughing at the very thought of it.
"I only had one wife," Ketut went on. "And now she dead."
"Do you miss her?"
"When she die, I very sad in my mind."
"Did you cry?"
"Only little bit, in my eyes. But I do meditation, to clean the body from pain. I visit her in meditation every day, even to kissing her. She the only woman I ever make sex with. So I do not know... what is new word, from today?"
"Romance?"
"Yes, romance. I do not know romance, Liss."
I finally sat down with Wayan and told her about the money I'd raised for her house. I explained about my birthday wish, showed her the list of all my friends' names, and then told her the final amount which had been raised: eighteen thousand American dollars. At first she was shocked, so I sat there with her for a few hours, telling her the story repeatedly and showing her the numbers again and again, until the reality began to sink in.
Her first really articulate response was to say, "Please, Liz, you must explain to everyone who helped raise money that this is not Wayan's house. This is the house of everyone who helped Wayan. If any of these people comes to Bali, they must never stay in a hotel, OK? You tell them they come and stay at my house, OK? Promise to tell them that? We call it Group House... the House for Everybody..."
Then she realized about the garden, and started to cry.
Slowly, though, happier realizations come to her. If she had a home, she could have a small library, for all her medical books! And a pharmacy for her traditional remedies! And a proper restaurant with real chairs and tables. If she had a home, she could finally be listed in Lonely Planet, who want to mention her services, but never can do so, because she never has a permanent address that they can print. If she had a home, Tutti could have a birthday party someday!
Then she got very sober and serious again.
"What would I do if you never came here?"
I thought about one of my favorite Sufi poems, which says that God long ago drew a circle in the sand exactly around the spot where you are standing right now. I was to come here.
"Where are you going to build your new house, Wayan?" I asked.
Wayan already knew exactly the piece of land she would like to buy. It was in the center of a nearby village, was connected to municipal water and electricity, had a good school nearby for Tutti, was nicely located in a central place where her patients and customers could find her on foot. Her brothers could help her build the home, she said.
So we went together to visit a nice French expatriate financial adviser and real estate guy, who was kind enough to suggest the best way to transfer the money. Then we went to Wayan's little bank, and talked to the manager about how to make a transfer. Finally, the bank manager said, "So, Wayan. When this transfer goes through, in just a few days, you should have about 180 million rupiah in your bank account."
Wayan and I looked at each other and started laughing. Such an enormous sum!
We returned to the shop, found Tutti just home from school. Wayan dropped to her knees, grabbed her girl, and said, "A house! A house! We have a house!" Tutti pretended to have a faint.
While we were all laughing, I noticed the two orphans watching this scene from the background of the kitchen, and I could see them looking at me with something in their faces that resembled... fear. I asked Wayan, just to be sure: "What about Big Ketut and Little Ketut? Is this good news for them, too?"
Wayan looked at the girls in the kitchen and saw the same uneasiness I had seen. She came to them and hugged them and whispered some reassuring words. They buried their heads in her belly and armpits, and even after a long time they refused to let her go.
I went out with Brazilian Felipe again, twice over the weekend. On Saturday I brought him to meet Wayan and the kids. I also brought Felipe to meet Ketut, my medicine man, and Ketut read his palm and said (while fixing me with a penetrating stare) that my friend is "a good man, a very good man, a very, very good man. Not a bad man, Liss - a good man."
Then on Sunday, Felipe asked me if I'd like to spend a day at the beach. It occurred to me that I'd been living here in Bali for two months already and had not yet seen the beach, so I said yes. He picked me up at my house in his jeep and we drove an hour to this hidden little beach in Pedangbai where hardly any tourists ever go. This place was a good imitation of paradise, with blue water and white sand and the shade of palm trees. We talked all day, interrupting our talking only to swim and nap and read, sometimes reading aloud to each other.
Then it was dark, so we packed up our things and went for a walk through the main street of this old Balinese fishing village under the stars. And then Felipe from Brazil asked me in the most natural way, "Should we have an affair together, Liz? What do you think?"
I liked everything about the way this was happening. Not with an action - not with an attempted kiss - but with a question. And the correct question, too.
I said, "I would probably say yes, Felipe, under normal circumstances. Whatever normal circumstances are..."
We both laughed. But then I showed him my hesitation. Which was this - that as much as I might enjoy to give my body and heart to the expert hands of an expat lover, something else inside me has requested that I donate this whole year of traveling all to myself. That some vital transformation is happening in my life, and this transformation needs time and room in order to finish its process undisturbed. I don't want to lose control of my life again.
Of course Felipe said that he understood, and that I should do whatever's best for me.
"Although," he went on, "you need to listen to me now."
"Fair enough," I said.
"For one thing, if I understand you correctly, this whole year is about your search for balance between devotion and pleasure. I can see where you've been doing a lot of devotional practices, but I'm not sure where the pleasure has come in so far."
"I ate a lot of pasta in Italy, Felipe."
"Pasta, Liz? Pasta?"
"Good point."
"For another thing, I think I know what you're worried about. Some man is going to come into your life and take everything from you again. I won't do that to you, darling. I've been alone for a long time, too, and I've lost a great deal in love, just like you have. I don't want us to take anything from each other. It's just that I've never enjoyed anyone's company as much as I enjoy yours, and I'd like to be with you. Don't worry - I'm not going to chase you back to New York when you leave here in September."
But still I said no.
He drove me home. Parked in front of my house, we shared a few sweet kisses. It was lovely. Of course it was lovely. But still, and again, I said no.
"That's fine, darling," he said. "But come over to my house tomorrow night for dinner, and I'll make you a steak."
Then he drove off and I went to bed alone.
I woke to a quiet blue sky and an even quieter bedroom. Still feeling unbalanced, I chanted the entire 182 Sanskrit verses of the Gurugita - the great, purifying fundamental hymn of my Ashram in India. Then I meditated for an hour until I finally felt it again - that specific, constant, clear-sky, never-shifting, nameless and changeless perfection of my own happiness. That happiness which is better, truly, than anything I have ever experienced anywhere else on this earth.
I was so glad I had made the decision to stay alone.
So I was surprised the next night when - after he'd made me dinner at his house and after we'd lain on his couch for several hours and discussed all kinds of subjects and after he'd unexpectedly leaned to me for a moment and sunk his face toward my armpit and pronounced how much he loved the marvelous smell of me - Felipe finally put his palm against my cheek and said, "That's enough, darling. Come to my bed now," and I did.
Yes, I came to his bed with him, in that bedroom with its big open windows looking out over the nighttime and the quiet Balinese rice fields. He parted the sheer, white curtain of mosquito netting that surrounded his bed and guided me in there. Then he helped me out of my dress with the tender competence of a man who had obviously spent many comfortable years getting his children ready for bathtime, and he explained to me his terms - that he wanted absolutely nothing from me except permission to adore me for as long as I wanted him to. Were those terms acceptable to me?
Having lost my voice somewhere between the couch and the bed, I only nodded. There was nothing left to say. It had been a long, ascetic season of solitude. I had done well for myself. But Felipe was right - that was enough.
We didn't sleep at all, of course. And then, it was ridiculous - I had to go. I had to go back to my house stupidly early the next morning because I had a date to meet my friend Yudhi. He and I had long ago planned that this was the very week we were going to leave on a big cross-Balinese road trip together. This idea came to us one evening at my house when Yudhi said that, aside from his wife and Manhattan, what he most missed about America was driving - just taking off with a car and some friends and going on an adventure across those great distances. I told him, "OK, so we'll go on a road trip here in Bali together, American-style."
This had struck us both as irresistibly comic - there's no way you can do an American-style road trip in Bali. There are no great distances, first of all, on an island the size of Delaware. But Yudhi and I decided to do it anyway, to take off for a week, rent a car and drive all over this tiny island, pretending that we are in America and that both of us are free. The idea charmed me when we came up with it last month, but the time for it now - as I am lying in bed with Felipe and he's kissing my fingertips and forearms and shoulders - seems unfortunate. But I have to go. And in a way, I want to go. Not only to spend a week with my friend Yudhi, but also as a rest after my big night with Felipe, to understand the new reality that, as they say in the novels: I have taken a lover.
So Felipe drops me off at my house with one last passionate embrace and I have just enough time to shower and pull myself together when Yudhi arrives with our rental car.
We set off for our fake American road trip across Bali, me and this cool young Indonesian musical genius. The back of our car is filled with guitars and beer and the Balinese equivalent of American road trip food - fried rice crackers and dreadfully flavored candies.
We drive along the coast, and it's beaches, beaches, beaches for a whole week. Sometimes we take a little fishing boat out to an island. We spend one day on the long southern California-style wonderful white sand surf of Kuta. Just as intended, we forget for long hours (purely for Yudhi's benefit) that we are in Indonesia at all as we tool around in this rented car, eating junk food and singing American songs, having pizza everywhere we can find it. Sometimes we discover calm stretches of blue ocean and we swim all day, permitting each other to start drinking beer at 10:00 AM. We make friends with everyone we encounter.
Every day I call Felipe, and he asks, "How many more sleeps until you come back to me?" He tells me, "I'm enjoying falling in love with you, darling. I haven't felt this way about anyone in nearly thirty years."
Not there yet, not yet to that place of a free fall into love, I make hesitant noises to remind him that I am leaving in a few months. Felipe is unconcerned. He says, "Maybe this is just some stupid romantic South American idea, but I need you to understand - darling, for you, I am even willing to suffer. Whatever pain happens to us in the future, I accept it already, just for the pleasure of being with you now. Let's enjoy this time. It's marvelous."
The last day of our road trip, Yudhi and I laze on a beach someplace for hours, and - as often happens with us - we start talking about New York City again, how great it is, how much we love it. Yudhi misses the city, he says, almost as much as he misses his wife - as if New York is a person, a relative, whom he has lost since he got deported.
I feel his longing for New York so deeply that for a moment I mistake it for my own. His homesickness infects me so completely that I forget for an instant that I am actually free to go back to Manhattan someday, though he is not. Yudhi looks out at the quiet, blue ocean and says, "I know it's beautiful here... but do you think I'll ever see America again?"
What can I tell him?
When we return to Ubud, I go straight back to Felipe's house and don't leave his bedroom for approximately another month. I have never been loved and adored like this before by anyone, never with such pleasure and single-minded concentration. Never have I been so unpeeled, revealed through the event of lovemaking.
One thing I do know about intimacy is that there are certain natural laws which govern the sexual experience of two people, and that these laws cannot be changed. To feel physically comfortable with someone else's body is not a decision you can make. It has very little to do with how two people think or act or talk or even look. The mysterious magnet is either there, or it is not. When it isn't there (as I have learned in the past, with heartbreaking clarity) you can no more force it to exist than a surgeon can force a patient's body to accept a kidney from the wrong donor.
Felipe and I, as we discover to our delight, are a perfectly matched success story. There are no parts of our bodies which are in any way allergic to any parts of the other's body. Nothing is dangerous, nothing is difficult, nothing is refused. Everything in our sensual universe is - simply and thoroughly - complemented.
I'm losing days here, disappearing under his sheets, under his hands. I like the feeling of not knowing what the date is. My nice organized schedule has been blown away by the breeze.
I still meditate every day of the week, slipping out of Felipe's bed and over to the couch, where I can sit in silence and offer up some gratitude for all of this. I am so relaxed now that I kind of slide into meditation like it's a bath prepared by my lover. Naked in the morning sun, with nothing but a light blanket wrapped over my shoulders, I disappear into grace.
Why did life ever seem difficult?
But all the fun and games caught up with me after a few weeks. After all those nights of not sleeping and all those days of too much lovemaking, my body struck back and I got attacked by a nasty infection in my bladder. It is a typical problem of the overly sexed. It came up as fast as any tragedy can strike. I was walking through town one morning when suddenly I felt burning pain and fever. I'd had these infections before, in my youth, so I knew what it was. I panicked for a moment - these things can be awful - but then thought, "Thank God my best friend in Bali is a healer," and I ran into Wayan's shop.
"I'm sick!" I said.
She took one look at me and said, "You sick from making too much sex, Liz."
I groaned, buried my face in my hands, embarrassed.
She chuckled, said, "You can't keep secrets from Wayan..."
Wayan, like a veteran firefighter, never moves fast. She methodically started chopping some herbs, boiling some roots, wandering back and forth between her kitchen and me, bringing me one warm, brown, toxic-tasting mixture after another, saying, "Drink, honey..."
Whenever the next batch boiled, she sat across from me, giving me sly, dirty looks and using the opportunity to get nosy.
"Are you careful not to get pregnant, Liz?"
"That's not possible, Wayan. Felipe has a vasectomy."
"Felipe has a vasectomy?" she asked, in awe. "Very difficult in Bali to get a man to do this. Always the woman problem, birth control."
"Sex is funny," she said. "Make people do funny things. Everyone gets like this, at the beginning of love. Wanting too much happiness, too much pleasure, until you make yourself sick. Even to Wayan this happens at beginning of love story. Lose balance."
"I'm embarrassed," I say.
"Don't," she said. Then she added in perfect English (and perfect Balinese logic), "To lose balance sometimes for love is part of living a balanced life."
I decided to call Felipe. I had some antibiotics at the house, an emergency pack I always travel with, just in case. As I have had these infections before, I know how bad they can get, even traveling up into your kidneys. I didn't want to go through that, not in Indonesia. So I called him and told him what had happened (he was horrified) and asked him to bring me over the pills. It wasn't that I didn't trust Wayan's healing competence, it's just that this was really serious pain...
She said, "You don't need Western pills."
"But maybe it's better, just to be safe..."
"Give two hours," she said. "If I don't make you better, you can take your pills."
Reluctantly, I agreed. My experience with these infections is that they can take days to clear, even with strong antibiotics. But I didn't want to make her feel bad.
Tutti was playing in the shop and she kept bringing little drawings of houses over to cheer me up, patting my hand with an eight-year-old's compassion.
"Did you buy your house yet, Wayan?" I asked.
"Not yet, honey. No hurry."
"What about that place you liked? I thought you were going to buy that?"
"Found out not for sale. Too expensive."
"Do you have any other places in mind?"
"Not worry about it now, Liz. For now, let me make you quickly feel better."
Felipe arrived with my medicine and a face full of guilt, apologizing to both me and Wayan.
"Not serious," said Wayan. "Not worry. I fix her soon. Quickly better."
Then she went into the kitchen and produced a giant glass mixing bowl full of leaves, roots, berries, some mass of something that looked like witches' hair... all floating in its own brown juice. There was about a gallon of it in the bowl.
"Drink, honey," Wayan said. "Drink all."
I suffered it down. And in less than two hours... well, we all know how the story ends. In less than two hours I was fine, totally healed. An infection was gone. I tried to pay Wayan, but she only laughed. "My sister doesn't need to pay." Then she turned on Felipe: "You be careful with her now. Only sleep tonight, no touching."
Then she said to us, "Go home now, you both. Go home, go to bed, but only sleeping, OK? Only SLEEPING!"
On the ride home Felipe asked, "Has she bought a house yet?"
"Not yet. But she says she's looking."
"It's been over a month already since you gave her the money, hasn't it?"
"Yeah, but the place she wanted, it wasn't for sale..."
"Be careful, darling," Felipe said.
"What do you mean?"
"I'm not trying to interfere in your business, but I've lived in this country for five years and I know how things are. Stories can get complicated around here. Sometimes it's hard to get to the truth of what's actually happening."
"What are you trying to say, Felipe?" I asked, and when he didn't answer immediately, I quoted to him one of his own signature lines: "If you tell me slowly, I can understand quickly."
"What I'm trying to say, Liz, is that your friends have raised an awful lot of money for this woman, and right now it's all sitting in Wayan's bank account. Make sure she actually buys a house with it."
The end of July came, and my thirty-fifth birthday with it. Wayan threw a birthday party for me in her shop, quite unlike any I have ever experienced before. Wayan had dressed me in a traditional Balinese birthday suit - a bright purple sarong, a strapless bustier and a long length of golden fabric that she wrapped tightly around my torso. As she was putting me into this exquisite costume, she asked, not quite looking at me, but doing some fancy tucking and pinning of material around my ribs, "You have prospect to marrying Felipe?"
"No," I said. "We have no prospects for marrying. I don't want any more husbands, Wayan. And I don't think Felipe wants any more wives. But I like being with him."
"Handsome on the outside is easy to find, but handsome on the outside and handsome on the inside - this not easy. Felipe has this."
I agreed.
She smiled. "And who bring this good man to you, Liz? Who prayed every day for this man?"
I kissed her. "Thank you, Wayan. You did a good job."
We started the birthday party. Wayan and the kids had decorated the whole place with balloons and palm fronds and handwritten signs with complex, run-on messages like, "Happy birthday to a nice and sweet heart, to you, our dearest sister, to our beloved Lady Elizabeth, Happy Birthday to you, always peace to you and Happy Birthday." Wayan has a brother whose young children are gifted dancers in temple ceremonies, and so the nieces and nephews came and danced for me right there in the restaurant.
Balinese parties are generally organized around the principle of people getting dressed up in their finest clothes, then sitting around and staring at each other. ("My God, darling," moaned Felipe, when I told him that Wayan was throwing me a Balinese birthday party, "it's going to be so boring...") It wasn't boring, though - just quiet. And different. There was the whole dressing-up part, and then there was the whole dance performance part, and then there was the whole sitting around and staring at each other part, which wasn't so bad. Everyone looked lovely. Wayan's whole family had come, and they kept smiling and waving at me from four feet away, and I kept smiling at them and waving back at them.
I blew out the candles of the birthday cake along with Little Ketut, the smallest orphan, whose birthday, I had decided a few weeks before, would also be on July 18 from now on, shared with my own, since she'd never had a birthday or a birthday party before. After we blew out the candles, Felipe presented Little Ketut with a Barbie doll, which she unwrapped in stunned wonder and then regarded as though it were a ticket for a rocket ship to Jupiter - something unimaginable.
Outside, the roosters started crowing, even though it was not yet evening, not yet dusk. My traditional Balinese clothing was squeezing me like a passionate hug, and I was feeling like this was definitely the strangest - but maybe the happiest - birthday party I'd ever experienced in my whole life.
Still, Wayan needs to buy a house, and I'm getting worried that it's not happening. I don't understand why it's not happening, but it absolutely needs to happen. Felipe and I have stepped in now. We found a realtor who could take us around and show us properties, but Wayan hasn't liked anything we've shown her. I keep telling her, "Wayan, it's important that we buy something. I'm leaving here in September, and I need to let my friends know before I leave that their money actually went into a home for you. And you need to get a roof over your head before you get driven out."
"Not so simple to buy land in Bali," she keeps telling me. "Not like to walk into a bar and buy a beer. Can take long time."
"We don't have a long time, Wayan."
She just shrugs, and I remember again about the Balinese concept of "rubber time," meaning that time is a very relative idea. "Four weeks" doesn't really mean to Wayan what it means to me. One day to Wayan isn't necessarily composed of twenty-four hours, either; sometimes it's longer, sometimes it's shorter, depending upon the spiritual and emotional nature of that day.
Meanwhile, it also turns out that I have completely underestimated how expensive it is to buy property in Bali. Because everything is so cheap here, you would assume that land is also undervalued, but that's a mistaken assumption. To buy land in Bali - especially in Ubud - can get almost as expensive as buying land in Tokyo, or on Rodeo Drive.
Moreover - as I discover throughout the month of August - it's almost impossible to find out when land is actually for sale around here. Balinese who are selling land typically don't like other people to know that their land is up for sale. If you're a Balinese farmer and you're selling your land, it means you are desperate for cash, and this is humiliating. Also, if your neighbors and family find out that you actually sold some land, then they'll think you came into some money, and everyone will be asking if they can borrow that money. So land becomes available for sale only by... rumor. And all these land deals are executed under strange veils of secrecy and deception.
Besides, it's almost impossible for Wayan to find a piece of land she deems appropriate for a home. She has to examine the taksu - the spirit - of each place. As a healer, Wayan's sense of taksu, even by Balinese standards, is supremely acute. I found one place that I thought was perfect, but Wayan said it was possessed by angry demons. The next piece of land was rejected because it was too close to a river, which, as everyone knows, is where ghosts live. Then we found a lovely little shop near town, with a backyard and everything, but it was located on a corner, and only somebody who wants to go bankrupt and die young would ever live in a house located on a comer. As everyone knows.
"Don't even try talking her out of it," Felipe advised me. "Trust me, darling. Don't get between the Balinese and their taksu."
Then last week Felipe found a place that fitted the criteria exactly - a small, pretty piece of land, close to central Ubud, on a quiet road, next to a rice field, with plenty of space for a garden and within our budget. When I asked Wayan, "Should we buy it?" she replied, "Don't know yet, Liz. Not too fast, for making decisions like this. I need talk to a priest first."
She explained that she would need to consult a priest in order to find a favorable day upon which to purchase the land, if she decides to buy it at all. Because nothing significant can be done in Bali before a favorable day is chosen. But she can't even ask the priests for the favorable date upon which to buy the land until she decides if she really wants to live there. Which she can't do until she's had a favorable dream. I asked Wayan, like a good New Yorker, "How soon can you arrange to have a favorable dream?"
Wayan replied, like a good Balinese, "Cannot be rushed, this." Although, she thought it might help if she could go to one of the major temples in Bali with an offering, and pray to the gods to bring her a favorable dream...
"OK," I said. "Tomorrow Felipe can drive you to the major temple and you can make an offering and ask the gods to send you a favorable dream."
Wayan would love to, she said. It's a great idea. Only one problem. She's not permitted to enter any temples for this entire week.
Because she is... menstruating.
I always liked Felipe. But his participation in buying Wayan's House brings us together during the month of August like a real couple. It's none of his concern, of course, what happens to this Balinese medicine woman. He's a businessman. But suddenly here he is walking with me through muddy rice paddies and trying to find a priest who will give Wayan a favorable date...
"I was perfectly happy in my boring life before you came along," he always says. He was bored in Bali before. That idleness stopped the moment we were introduced.
He's a caregiver by nature, and I can feel him going into a kind of orbit around me. Felipe is the kind of man who desperately needs a woman in his life - but not so that he can be taken care of; only so that he can have someone to care for. Now he is organizing himself around me. It's lovely to be treated this way. But it also scares me. I wonder if I am capable of being somebody's sun, somebody's everything. Am I centered enough now to be the center of somebody else's life? But when I finally brought up the topic with him one night, he said, "Have I asked you to be that person, darling? Have I asked you to be the center of my life?"
"I'm sorry," I said. "That was a little arrogant, wasn't it?"
"A little," he acknowledged, then kissed my ear. "But not so much, really. Darling, of course it's something we have to discuss because here's the truth - I'm wildly in love with you." Then he made a quick joke, trying to be reassuring: "I mean that in a completely hypothetical way, of course." But then he said in all seriousness, "Look, I'm fifty-two years old. Believe me, I already know how the world works. I recognize that you don't love me yet the way I love you, but the truth is that I don't really care. For some reason, I feel the same way about you that I felt about my kids when they were small - that it wasn't their job to love me, it was my job to love them. You can decide to feel however you want to, but I love you and I will always love you. Even if we never see each other again, you already brought me back to life, and that's a lot. And of course, I'd like to share my life with you. The only problem is, I'm not sure how much of a life I can offer you in Bali."
This is a concern I've had, too. I've been watching the expatriate society in Ubud, and I know for sure this is not the life for me. Westerners living here are talented and clever people. But it seems to me that everyone I meet here used to be something once (generally "married" or "employed"); now they are all united by the absence of the one thing they seem to have surrendered completely and forever: ambition. Needless to say, there's a lot of drinking.
There is much to enjoy in their lazy company, in these long Sunday afternoons spent at brunch, drinking champagne and talking about nothing. Still, when I am around this scene, I feel somewhat like Dorothy in the poppy fields of Oz. Be careful! Don't fall asleep in this narcotic meadow, or you could doze away the rest of your life here!
So what will become of me and Felipe? He told me not long ago, "Sometimes I wish you were a lost little girl and I could pick you up and say, 'Come and live with me now, let me take care of you forever.' But you aren't a lost little girl. You're a woman with a career, with ambition. You are a perfect snail: you carry your home on your back. You should hold on to that freedom for as long as possible. But all I'm saying is this - if you want this Brazilian man, you can have him. I'm yours already."
I'm not sure what I want. I know that there's a part of me which has always wanted to hear a man say, "Let me take care of you forever," and I have never heard it spoken before. Over the last few years, I'd given up looking for that person, learned how to say this heartening sentence to myself, especially in times of fear. But to hear it from someone else now, from someone who is speaking sincerely...
I was thinking about all this last night after Felipe fell asleep, and I was curled up beside him, wondering what would become of us. What are the possible futures? What about the geography question between us - where would we live? Then there's the age difference to consider. Truthfully, though, I actually like that Felipe is so much older. I think it's sexy. Makes me feel kind of... French.
What will happen with us?
Why am I worrying about this, by the way?
So after a while, I stopped thinking about all this and just held him while he slept. I am falling in love with this man. Then I fell asleep beside him and had two memorable dreams.
Both were about my Guru. In the first dream, my Guru informed me that she was closing down her Ashrams and that she would no longer be speaking, teaching or publishing books. She gave her students one final speech, in which she said, "You've had more than enough teachings. You have been given everything you need to know in order to be free. It's time for you to go out in the world and live a happy life."
The second dream was even more confirming. I was eating in a terrific restaurant in New York City with Felipe. We were having a wonderful meal of lamb chops and artichokes and fine wine and we were talking and laughing happily. I looked across the room and saw Swamiji, my Guru's master, who died in 1982. But he was alive that night, right there in a noisy New York restaurant. He was eating dinner with a group of his friends and they were also having a good time. Our eyes met across the room and Swamiji smiled at me and raised his wineglass in a toast.
And then - quite distinctly - this small Indian Guru mouthed this one word to me across the distance:
Enjoy.
I haven't seen Ketut Liyer so long. I was so busy with my romance and my struggle to secure a home for Wayan. Still, I miss the old man, so I stopped by to talk with him this morning. He beamed at me, as usual, saying, "I am very happy to meet you!" (I never was able to break him of that habit.)
"I am happy to see you, too, Ketut."
"You leaving soon, Liss?"
"Yes, Ketut. In less than two weeks. That's why I wanted to come over today. I wanted to thank you for everything you've given me. I came back to Bali thanks to you."
"You would come back to Bali, anyway," he said without doubt or drama. "You still meditate with your four brothers like I teach you?"
"Yes."
"You still meditate like your Guru in India teach you?"
"Yes."
"You happy now with God?"
"Very."
"You love new boyfriend?"
"I think so. Yes."
"Then you must spoil him. And he must spoil you."
"OK," I promised.
"You are good friend to me. Better than friend. You are like my daughter," he said. "When I die, you will come back to Bali, come to my cremation. Balinese cremation ceremony very fun - you will like it."
"OK," I promised.
The deal failed with Wayan. That property Felipe had found for her somehow didn't happen. When I ask Wayan what went wrong, I get some unclear reply. What matters is only that it's a dead deal. I'm starting to get panicked about this whole Wayan house situation.
But a few days later Wayan calls over at Felipe's house, excited. She's found a different piece of land, and this one she really loves. An emerald expanse of rice field on a quiet road, close to town. It has good taksu. Wayan tells us that the land belongs to a farmer, a friend of her father's, who is desperate for cash. He has seven aro total to sell, but (needing fast money) would give her only the two aro she can afford. She loves this land. I love this land. Felipe loves this land. Tutti loves it, too.
"Buy it," I tell Wayan.
But a few days pass, and nothing happens. "Do you want to live there or not?" I keep asking.
She changes her story again. This morning, she says, the farmer called to tell her he isn't certain anymore whether he can sell only the two-aro parcel to her; instead, he might want to sell the whole seven- aro lot... it's his wife that's the problem... The farmer needs to talk to his wife, see if it's OK with her to break up the land...
Wayan says, "Maybe if I had more money..."
I'm telling her, "Wayan, I can't do it, I don't have the money. Can't you make a deal with the farmer?"
Then Wayan tells a complicated story. She tells me that she visited a mystic the other day and the mystic went into a trance and said that Wayan absolutely needs to buy this entire seven-aro package in order to make a good healing center... that this is destiny... and, anyway, the mystic also said that if Wayan could have the entire package of land, then maybe she could someday build a nice fancy hotel there...
A nice fancy hotel?
Ah.
That's when suddenly I go deaf and I can see Wayan's mouth moving but I'm not listening to her anymore because a thought has just come: SHE'S THROWING DUST INTO MY EYES.
I stand up, say good-bye to Wayan, walk home slowly and ask Felipe for his opinion: "Is she throwing dust into my eyes?"
He has not ever commented upon my business with Wayan, not once.
"Darling," he says kindly. "Of course she is."
My heart drops into my guts.
"But not intentionally," he adds quickly. "You need to understand the thinking in Bali. It's a way of life here for people to try to get the most money they can out of visitors. It's how everyone survives. So she's making up some stories now about the farmer. Darling, since when does a Balinese man need to talk to his wife before he can make a business deal? Listen - the guy is desperate to sell her a small parcel; he already said he would. But she wants the whole thing now. And she wants you to buy it for her."
I get embarrassed at this for two reasons. First of all, I hate to think this could be true of Wayan. Second, I hate the cultural implications under his speech, "this-is-what-all-these-people-are-like" argument.
But Felipe explains, "Listen, I grew up poor in South America. You think I don't understand the culture of this kind of poverty? You've given Wayan more money than she's ever seen in her life and now she's thinking crazy. As far as she's concerned, you're her miracle benefactor and this might be her last chance."
"What should I do?"
"Don't get angry about it, whatever happens. If you get angry, you'll lose her, and that would be a pity because she's a marvelous person and she loves you. This is her survival tactic, just accept that. You must not think that she's not a good person, or that she and the kids don't honestly need your help. But you cannot let her use you."
"But what should I do?"
"You need to get back some control of the situation. Play some kind of game with her, like the games she's playing with you. Threaten her with something that motivates her to act. You'll be doing her a favor; she needs a home."
"I don't want to play games, Felipe."
He kisses my head. "Then you can't live in Bali, darling."
The next morning, I make my plan. I can't believe it - I'm about to lie to my favorite person in Bali, to someone who is like a sister to me, someone who has cleaned my kidneys. I'm going to lie to Tutti's mommy!
I walk into town, into Wayan's shop. Wayan goes to hug me. I pull away, pretending to be upset.
"Wayan," I say. "We need to talk. I have a serious problem."
"With Felipe?"
"No. With you."
She looks like she's going to faint.
"Wayan," I say. "My friends in America are very angry with you."
"With me? Why, honey?"
"Because four months ago, they gave you a lot of money to buy a home, and you did not buy a home yet. Every day, they send me e-mails, asking me, 'Where is Wayan's house? Where is my money?' Now they think you are stealing their money, using it for something else."
"I'm not stealing!"
"Wayan," I say. "My friends in America think you are... a bullshit."
She looks really wounded. Bullshit is a word that has been more emotionally incorporated into Balinese than almost any other in the English language. It's one of the very worst things you can call someone in Bali - "a bullshit."
"Honey," she said, eyes tearing. "I am not a bullshit!"
"I know that, Wayan. This is why I'm so upset. I try to tell my friends in America that Wayan is not a bullshit, but they don't believe me."
She lays her hand on mine. "I'm sorry, honey."
"Wayan, my friends are angry. They say that you must buy some land before I come back to America. They told me that if you don't buy some land in the next week, then I must... take the money back."
Now she doesn't look like she's going to faint; she looks like she's going to die. How could she know that I have no power to take that money out of her bank account? I made the money magically appear in her bankbook, didn't I? Couldn't I just as easily take it away?
"Honey," she says, "believe me, I find land now, don't worry, very fast I find land. Please don't worry... maybe in next three days this is finish, I promise."
"You must, Wayan," I say. "I'm going back to Felipe's house now. Call me when you've bought something." Then I walk away from my friend, aware that she is watching me but refusing to turn around and look back at her. I go home to Felipe, feeling awful.
Just four hours later the phone rings in Felipe's house. It's Wayan. She's breathless. She wants me to know the job is finished. She has just purchased the two aro from the farmer (whose "wife" suddenly didn't mind breaking up the property). There was no need, as it turns out, for any magic dreams or priestly interventions or taksu radiation-level tests. Wayan even has the certificate of ownership already, in her hands! And it's notarized! Also, she assures me, she has already ordered construction materials for her house and workers will start building early next week - before I leave. So I can see the project under way. She hopes that I am not angry with her. She wants me to know that she loves me more than she loves her own body, more than she loves her own life, more than she loves this whole world.
I tell her that I love her, too. And that I can't wait to be a guest someday in her beautiful new home. And that I would like a photocopy of that certificate of ownership.
When I get off the phone, Felipe says, "Good girl."
I don't know whether he's referring to her or me. But he opens a bottle of wine and we raise a toast to our dear friend Wayan the Balinese landowner.
Then Felipe says, "Can we go on vacation now, please?"
The place we go on vacation is a tiny island called Gili Meno. I'd been to Gili Meno before, and I wanted to show it to Felipe, who had never been there.
The island of Gili Meno is one of the most important places in the world to me. I came here by myself two years ago when I was in Bali for the first time. I was on that magazine assignment, writing about Yoga vacations, and I'd just finished two weeks of Yoga classes. But I had decided to extend my stay in Indonesia after the assignment was up. What I wanted to do, actually, was to find someplace very remote and give myself a ten-day retreat of absolute solitude and absolute silence.
When I look back at the four years between my marriage starting to fall apart and the day I was finally divorced and free, I see a detailed chronicle of total pain. And the moment when I came to this tiny island all by myself was the very worst of that entire dark journey.
I rented myself a little cabin on the beach for a few dollars a day and I shut my mouth and vowed not to open it again until something inside me had changed. I had chosen the right place. The island itself is tiny, sandy, blue water, palm trees. It's a perfect circle with a single path that goes around it, and you can walk the whole circumference in about an hour. It's located almost exactly on the equator. The sun comes up on one side of the island at about 6:30 in the morning and goes down on the other side at around 6:30 PM, every day of the year. The place is inhabited by a small handful of Muslim fishermen and their families. There is no spot on this island from which you cannot hear the ocean. There are no motorized vehicles here. Electricity comes from a generator, and for only a few hours in the evenings. It's the quietest place I've ever been.
Every morning I walked the circumference of the island at sunrise, and walked it again at sunset. The rest of the time, I just sat and watched. Watched my thoughts, watched my emotions, watched the fishermen. The Yogic sages say that all the pain of a human life is caused by words, as is all the joy. To stop talking for a while, then, is to attempt to strip away the power of words, to liberate ourselves from our suffocating mantras.
It took me a while to drop into true silence. Even after I'd stopped talking, I found that I was still humming with language. It took a surprisingly long time for all this pulsation of speech to fall away. Maybe it took about three days.
Then everything started coming up. In that state of silence, there was room now for everything hateful, everything fearful, to run across my empty mind. I cried a lot. I prayed a lot. It was difficult and it was terrifying, but I knew that I needed to do this and that I needed to do it alone.
On my ninth day of silence, I went into meditation one evening on the beach as the sun was going down and I didn't stand up again until after midnight. I remember thinking, "This is it, Liz." I said to my mind, "This is your chance. Show me everything that is causing you sorrow. Let me see all of it. Don't hold anything back." One by one, the thoughts and memories of sadness raised their hands, stood up to identify themselves. I looked at each thought, at each unit of sorrow, and I accepted its existence and felt (without trying to protect myself from it) its horrible pain. And then I told that sorrow, "It's OK. I love you. I accept you. Come into my heart now. It's over." I would actually feel the sorrow (as if it were a living thing) enter my heart (as if it were an actual room). Then I would say, "Next?" and the next bit of grief came.
I experienced it, blessed it, and invited it into my heart, too. I did this with every sorrowful thought I'd ever had - reaching back into years of memory - until nothing was left.
Then I said to my mind, "Show me your anger now." One by one, my life's every incident of anger rose. Every injustice, every betrayal, every loss, every rage. I saw them all, one by one, and I accepted their existence. I felt each piece of anger completely, and then I said, "Come into my heart now. You can rest there. It's safe now. It's over. I love you." This went on for hours.
Then came the most difficult part. "Show me your shame," I asked my mind. Dear God, the horrors that I saw then. A pitiful parade of all my failings, my lies, my selfishness, jealousy, arrogance. When I tried to invite these units of shame into my heart, they each hesitated at the door, saying, "No - you don't want me in there... don't you know what I did?" and I said, "I want you. Even you. I do. Even you are welcome here. It's OK. You are forgiven. You are part of me. You can rest now. It's over."
When all this was finished, I was empty. Nothing was fighting in my mind anymore. I looked into my heart, and I saw that my heart was not even nearly full, not even after having taken in sorrow and anger and shame; my heart could easily receive and forgive even more. Its love was infinite.
I knew then that this is how God loves us all and receives us all, and that there is no such thing in this universe as hell, except maybe in our own terrified minds. Because if even one broken and limited human being could experience even one such episode of absolute forgiveness and acceptance of her own self, then imagine - just imagine! - what God, in all His eternal compassion, can forgive and accept.
I also knew somehow that this period of peace would be temporary. I knew that I was not yet finished for good, that my anger, my sadness and my shame would all creep back eventually, escaping my heart, and occupying my head once more. But my heart said to my mind in the dark silence of that beach: "I love you, I will never leave you, I will always take care of you." That promise floated up out of my heart and I caught it in my mouth and held it there, tasting it as I left the beach and walked back to the little cabin where I was staying. I found an empty notebook, opened it up to the first page - and only then I opened my mouth and spoke those words into the air, letting them free. I let those words break my silence and then I allowed my pencil to document their colossal statement onto the page:
"I love you, I will never leave you, I will always take care of you."
Those were the first words I ever wrote in that private notebook of mine, which I carried with me from that moment on, turning back to it many times over the next two years, always asking for help - and always finding it, even when I was most deadly sad or afraid. And that notebook, with that promise of love, was the only reason I survived the next years of my life.
And now I'm coming back to Gili Meno under notably different circumstances. Since I was last here, I've circled the world, settled my divorce, survived my final separation from David, erased all mood-altering medications from my system, learned to speak a new language, sat upon God's palm for a few unforgettable moments in India, studied at the feet of an Indonesian medicine man and purchased a home for a family who badly needed a place to live. I am happy and healthy and balanced. And, yes, I am sailing to this pretty little tropical island with my Brazilian lover. Which is - I admit it! - an almost ridiculously fairy-tale ending to this story. Yet I was not rescued by a prince; I was the administrator of my own rescue.
My thoughts turn to something I read once, something the Zen Buddhists believe. They say that an oak tree is brought into creation by two forces at the same time. Obviously, there is the acorn from which it all begins, the seed which holds all the promise and potential, which grows into the tree. Everybody can see that. But only a few can recognize that there is another force operating here as well - the future tree itself, which wants so badly to exist that it pulls the acorn into being, guiding the evolution from nothingness to maturity. In this respect, say the Zens, it is the oak tree that creates the very acorn from which it was born.
I think about the woman I have become lately, about the life that I am now living, and about how much I always wanted to be this person and live this life, liberated from the farce of pretending to be anyone other than myself. And I wonder if it was me - I mean, this happy and balanced me, who is now dozing on the deck of this small Indonesian fishing boat - who pulled the other, younger, more confused and more struggling me forward during all those hard years. The younger me was the acorn full of potential, but it was the older me, the already-existent oak, who was saying the whole time: "Yes - grow! Change! Evolve! Come and meet me here, where I already exist in wholeness and maturity! I need you to grow into me!" And maybe it was this present and fully actualized me who whispered lovingly to that desperate girl on the bathroom floor, "Go back to bed, Liz..." Knowing already that everything would be OK, that everything would eventually bring us together here. Right here, right to this moment.
Then Felipe wakes up. He tells me that he had an idea while he was sleeping. He says, "You know - I obviously need to keep living in Bali because my business is here, and because it's so close to Australia, where my kids live. I also need to be in Brazil often, because that's where the gemstones are and because I have family there. And you obviously need to be in the United States, because that's where your work is, and that's where your family and friends are. So I was thinking... maybe we could try to build a life together that's somehow divided between America, Australia, Brazil and Bali."
All I can do is laugh, because, hey - why not? Of course this is how we should live. And I quite like the poetry of his idea, too, I must say. I mean that literally. After this whole year spent exploring the individual and fearless I's, Felipe has just suggested to me a whole new theory of traveling:
Australia, America, Bali, Brazil = A, A, B, B.
Like a classic poem, like a pair of rhyming couplets.
The little fishing boat anchors right off the shore of Gili Meno. There are no docks here on this island. So me and my lover, we take off our shoes, we pile our small bags of belongings on the tops of our heads and we prepare to leap over the edge of that boat together, into the sea.
You know, it's a funny thing. The only Romance language Felipe doesn't speak is Italian. But I go ahead and say it to him anyway, just as we're about to jump.
I say: "Attraversiamo"
Let's cross over.
Chapter one
Jean Valjean
One evening in October 1815, an hour before sunset, a man with a long beard and dusty, torn clothes walked into the town of Digne. He was in his late forties, of medium height, broad-shouldered and strong. A leather cap half-hid his face, which was sunburnt and shining with sweat. His rough yellow shirt was unbuttoned, revealing a hairy chest. On his back was a heavy soldier's bag, and in his hand was a large wooden stick.
The townspeople, who had never seen him before, watched with interest as he stopped for water at a fountain. Children followed him to the marketplace, where he stopped for more water at another fountain. He then crossed the square towards an inn, and entered by the kitchen door.
The innkeeper, who was also the cook, was busy with his pots and pans, preparing a meal for a group of travellers who were laughing and joking in the next room.
'What can I do for you, Monsieur?' he asked without looking up.
'A meal and a bed,' said the stranger.
'Of course.' The innkeeper turned to look at him. Then, seeing the visitors rough appearance, he added, 'If you can pay for it.'
'I have money.' The stranger produced an old leather purse from his jacket.
'Then you're welcome,' the innkeeper said.
The stranger smiled with relief and sat down by the fire. He did not see a young boy run out with a note that the innkeeper had quickly written. He did not see the boy return a short time later and whisper something to the innkeeper.
'When will the meal be ready?' the stranger asked.
'I'm sorry, Monsieur,' the innkeeper said. 'You can't stay here. I've got no free rooms.'
'Then put me in a stable. All I need is a quiet corner somewhere. After dinner
'You can't eat here either,' the innkeeper interrupted. 'I haven't enough food.'
'What about all that food in the pots?'
The innkeeper approached and, bending towards the man, said in a fierce whisper, 'Get out. I know who you are. Your name is Jean Valjean. You've just been released from prison. I can't serve people like you here.'
The man rose without another word, picked up his bag and stick, and left. Outside, it was growing dark and a cold wind was blowing from the mountains in the east. The man looked around, desperate for somewhere to spend the night. He tried another inn, but the same thing happened. He knocked on the doors of people's houses, but news of his arrival had quickly spread and nobody would offer him shelter from the cold. He even tried sleeping in a garden, but was chased away by a dog. Finally, he found himself in the cathedral square. He shook his fist at the church and then, cold and hungry, he lay down on a stone bench by the doorway.
A few minutes later, an old woman came out of the cathedral and saw him lying there.
'What are you doing?' she asked.
He answered angrily, 'Can't you see? I'm trying to sleep.'
'On this bench, in this cold wind?'
'I've slept for nineteen years on a piece of wood. Now it's stone. What's the difference?'
'Why don't you go to an inn?'
'Because I haven't any money,' he lied.
The old woman opened her purse and gave him a few coins. Then she said, 'Have you tried everywhere?'
'I've knocked at every door.'
'What about that one over there?' she said, pointing across the square to a small house beside the bishop's palace.
The Bishop of Digne was a kind old man who, many years earlier, had given his palace to the town hospital. He lived a simple life with his sister, Mademoiselle Baptistine, and his old servant, Madame Magloire, and he was much loved by the people in the town. He trusted everyone. His doors were never locked, so that anybody who needed his help could find him easily.
That evening, Mme Magloire was chatting with Mile Baptistine before serving the meal.
'People say there's a stranger in town,' she said. 'The police say that he looks dangerous, and it would be better for everyone to lock their windows and doors.'
'Brother.' Mile Baptistine turned to the bishop, who was sitting by the fire. 'Did you hear what Mme Magloire was saying?'
'Something about a dangerous stranger walking the streets?' he asked with an amused smile.
'This is no joke,' Mme Magloire said. 'The man is in rags and has an evil look on his face. Everybody in the town agrees that something terrible will happen tonight. And your sister agrees with me that this house isn't safe. If you like, I can make arrangements now to get a lock put on the door
Before the bishop could reply, there was a heavy knock on the door.
'Come in,' said the bishop.
The door opened and Jean Valjean, the stranger, walked in. Mme Magloire trembled, open-mouthed with fear, while Mile Baptistine rose from her seat with alarm. The bishop, however, looked calmly at his unexpected visitor.
'My name is Jean Valjean,' the stranger said before anybody could speak. 'I've been in prison for nineteen years. They let me out four days ago. I've been walking all day, and nobody in this town will give me food or a bed for the night. A woman saw me lying on a stone bench across the square and suggested that I come here. So here I am. What is this place? Is it an inn? I've got money. Will you let me stay?'
'Mme Magloire,' said the bishop, 'will you please prepare another place at the table for this gentleman?'
Valjean took a step forward. 'No, you don't understand,' he said. 'I've spent five years in prison for violent robbery, another fourteen years for trying to escape four times. I'm a dangerous man.'
'Mme Magloire,' the bishop went on, 'you must put clean sheets on the bed in the spare room.'
Mme Magloire, an obedient servant, left the room without protest.
The bishop turned to the man. 'Sit down and warm yourself, Monsieur. Supper will soon be ready.'
Jean Valjean's face, which had been hard and fierce, suddenly softened. 'You really mean it?' he asked, his voice trembling with childish excitement. 'You'll let me stay? I'm a dangerous criminal, but you called me "Monsieur". I don't believe it. May I ask your name, sir? Are you an innkeeper?'
'I'm a priest,' said the bishop. 'And this is where I live.'
'A priest?' Valjean said, sitting by the fire. 'So I don't have to pay?'
'You can keep your money,' the bishop replied.
During dinner, Mile Baptistine looked at Valjean kindly while the bishop talked about the local cheese-making industry. Valjean was so hungry that, at first, he paid no attention to anyone. Soon, however, he began to relax, and looked around the room. 'This is not the house of a rich man,' he thought. 'And the travellers in the inn eat better than this.' But then he looked at the table, and saw the beautiful silver candlesticks, knives and forks.
After dinner, the bishop said goodnight to his sister, picked up one of the two candlesticks and, handing the other to his guest, said, 'I'll show you to your room, Monsieur.'
Valjean followed the bishop upstairs into a bedroom. This was the bishop's bedroom. As he was following the bishop across the room, however, he noticed Mme Magloire putting the silver knives and forks in a cupboard by the bed.
The bishop showed his guest into the spare room.
'Sleep well,' he said. 'Before you leave tomorrow, you must have a bowl of warm milk from our cows.'
Valjean was so tired that he fell asleep, fully-dressed, on top of the sheets, but he didn't sleep for long. When he woke up, the cathedral clock was striking two, but he had not woken because of this. He had woken because the bed was too comfortable; he had not slept in a proper bed for twenty years. Unable to return to sleep, he gazed into the darkness, thinking about the past twenty years. Life had been unjust to him, and he was angry. In 1795, he had lost his job as a tree-cutter. At that time he was looking after his sister, whose husband had died, and her seven children. Out of work, and with no food in the house, he had been arrested for trying to steal a loaf of bread. Now, at last, he was free, but he felt bitter and angry about his lost years. The world had been unfair to him, and he wanted revenge. Then, remembering the silver on the bishop's table, he had an idea.
He sat up, swung his feet to the floor and slowly stood up. The house was silent. He moved carefully towards the window and looked out. The night was not very dark; there was a full moon, hidden from time to time by large clouds moving quickly across the sky. After studying the garden, he decided that escape would be easy. He turned back to the room, picked up his bag and took out a short iron bar, sharpened at one end. He then put his shoes into the bag and, grasping the iron bar in his right hand, he moved quietly towards the door of the bishop's bedroom. It was half-open. The bishop had not closed it.
Valjean stood listening. There was no sound.
He gave the door a gentle push and crept into the bedroom. Just as he reached the side of the bishop's bed, the moon came out from behind a cloud and filled the room with light. Valjean gazed down at the bishop's gentle, sleeping face, and felt a kind of terror. He had never before seen such peace, such kindness, such trust.
He suddenly turned away and moved quickly to the cupboard. The first thing he saw when he opened the door was the basket of silver. He grabbed it, hurried back to the spare bedroom, picked up his stick and bag, climbed out of the window, emptied the silver into his bag and threw the basket into the garden. A minute later he climbed the garden wall and disappeared into the trees.
Early the next morning, while the bishop was studying the flowers in his garden, Mme Magloire ran out of the house with a look of alarm on her face.
'Monseigneur, do you know where the silver-basket is?'
'Yes,' said the bishop. 'I found it in one of the flowerbeds.'
'But it's empty!' she cried. 'Where's the silver?'
'Oh, you're worried about the silver? I don't know where that is.'
'Heaven save us, it's been stolen!' she cried. 'The man who came last night! He's run off with our silver!'
The bishop, who had been bending sadly over a plant damaged by the basket, looked up and said gently, 'I think I was wrong to keep the silver for so long. It really belongs to the poor. I should have given it away a long time ago.'
Later that morning, as the bishop and his sister were having breakfast, there was a knock on the door. Four men walked into the room. Three of them were policemen; the fourth was Jean Valjean.
'Monseigneur... ' the sergeant in charge of the group began.
Valjean raised his head with surprise. 'Monseigneur?' he repeated. 'I thought he was a priest.'
'Silence,' said one of the policemen, 'This is the Bishop of Digne.'
The bishop, meanwhile, had moved towards the group of men and was smiling at Jean Valjean.
'I'm delighted to see you again, dear friend,' he said. 'But what about the candlesticks? I gave you those as well, don't you remember? They're silver like the rest, and worth at least two hundred francs. Did you forget to take them?'
Jean Valjean's eyes widened with disbelief.
'Monseigneur,' said the sergeant, 'do I understand that this man was telling the truth? We found this silver in his bag, and
'And he told you,' the bishop finished the sentence for him, 'that an old priest had given it to him? Yes, he was telling the truth.'
'So this man isn't a thief? 'The sergeant looked as surprised as Valjean.
'Not at all. So you can let him go at once.'
The policemen let go of Valjean's arms. He moved his feet nervously, uncertain of what to say at first. Then he murmured, 'Am I really free to go?'
'Of course,' said the bishop. 'But this time, you mustn't forget your candlesticks.'
He fetched them from a shelf and gave them to Valjean.
'Now, go in peace,' he said softly.
The policemen left, but Valjean did not move. He did not know what to think. The bishop walked up to him and said in a low voice, 'Don't forget that you've promised to use the money to make yourself an honest man.'
Valjean, who did not remember having made such a promise, was silent.
'Jean Valjean,' the bishop continued, 'I've bought your soul from the Devil, and have given it to God.'
Jean Valjean left the town and ran into the countryside, blindly following lanes and paths, not realizing that he was running in circles. He was filled with a strange kind of anger, but he did not know why. Finally, as evening fell, he sat on the ground, exhausted, and gazed across the fields at the distant mountains, wishing that he was back in prison. When he had been angry at the world, he had felt calm and sure of himself. But now, for the first time in twenty years, a man had shown him great kindness, and he did not know what to feel.
Suddenly, he heard the sound of singing. A boy of about ten years old was coming along a footpath with a small box on his back and dirty knees showing through holes in his trousers. As he sang, he threw a coin into the air and caught it before it fell. Not noticing Jean Valjean sitting by the side of the path, he threw the coin higher into the air. This time, however, he did not catch it and it rolled along the ground towards Valjean, who immediately put his foot on it.
The boy, unafraid, walked up to Valjean.
'Please, Monsieur, may I have my coin?'
'What's your name?' asked Valjean.
'Petit-Gervais,' said the boy, smiling trustfully. 'I'm a chimney sweep, and that money is all I have.'
'Go away,' said Valjean.
'Please, Monsieur, that's my money.'
Valjean lowered his head and did not reply.
'My money!' the boy cried. 'My piece of silver! My coin!'
Valjean seemed not to hear him. The boy seized his collar and shook him. 'I want my money!' he cried.
Valjean slowly raised his head and stared with a sort of amazement at the child. Then, reaching for his stick, he said, 'Go to Hell!'
The boy, suddenly afraid of the mad, fierce look in Valjean's eyes, turned and ran.
Valjean stood for some time gazing emptily around him at the sunset and the shadows moving in on him. Suddenly he shivered, as if he had become aware for the first time of the icy wind. He bent down to pick up his bag but, as he did so, he caught sight of the silver coin, half-buried by his foot in the earth.
It affected him like an electric shock. 'What's that?' he murmured. He stared at the coin with a look of puzzlement, as if he were trying to remember something. Then, with a sudden movement, he bent down and picked it up. He looked around but could see nothing in the darkness - just a purple mist rising slowly from the fields.
He called the boy's name, but there was no reply. Within minutes he was running along the path, shouting. 'Petit-Gervais! Petit-Gervais!' There was still no reply.
A short time later, he met a priest on horseback.
'Have you seen a boy go by?' he asked.
The priest shook his head. 'No. Why do you ask?'
Valjean produced two five-franc pieces and gave them to the priest. 'This is for your poor, Monsieur. He was a boy of about ten, a chimney sweep. Monsieur, you must report me to the police. I'm a thief. I stole money from him. Here, let me give you more money
But before Valjean could produce more coins, the priest rode away in terror.
Valjean looked for the boy for another hour, running along the path, calling out his name, but with no success. Finally he stopped and sat, exhausted, on a rock. Then, his heart full of grief for what he had done, he buried his face in his hands and, for the first time in nineteen years, he cried.
Chapter two
Fantine
On a spring evening in 1818, in the village of Montfermeil, not far from Paris, two little girls were playing on a swing outside a small inn. Their mother - a big, red-haired woman with a plain face - sat on the doorstep of the inn, watching them.
'You have two very pretty children, Madame,' a voice said from close beside her.
The woman looked round and saw a young woman with a child sleeping peacefully in her arms. The mother was young and pretty, but she looked poor and unhappy. She did not smile, and lines of sadness ran down the side of her pale cheeks. Her clothes were old and dirty, and she wore a tight, plain cap over her beautiful blonde hair.
'Thank you,' said the woman. 'Why don't you sit down for a minute? You look tired. 'When the young woman had sat down next to her, the red-haired woman introduced herself. 'My name's Thenardier. My husband and I manage this inn.'
'My names Fantine,' the young woman said. 'I used to work in Paris, but my husband died and I lost my job.' She could not tell Mme Thenardier the truth, which was that she had been made pregnant by a young man who had then abandoned her. 'I left Paris this morning to look for work in Montreuil,' she continued. 'My little girl walked some of the way, but she's very small. I had to carry her and she's fallen asleep.' As she spoke these words, she gave her daughter a loving kiss, which woke her up. The child's eyes were as wide and blue as her mother's. With a little laugh, she jumped off her mother's lap and ran to play with the two girls on the swing.
'What's your little girl's name?' Mme Thenardier asked.
'Euphrasie - but I call her Cosette. She's nearly three.'
The two women watched the children playing together.
'Children make friends very easily, don't they?' Mme Thenardier smiled. 'Look at them. They could easily be sisters.'
At these words, Fantine did a very strange thing. She took Mme Thenardiers hand and said, 'Will you look after my daughter for me?'
Mme Thenardier looked at Fantine thoughtfully, but said nothing.
'I can't take her with me,' Fantine continued. 'I have to find work, and that's not easy with a child but no husband. As soon as I find a job, I'll come and fetch her. Will you do that for me? I could pay six francs a month.'
Mme Thenardier still said nothing, but a man's voice from inside the house called, 'We'll take seven francs a month, and six months in advance.'
Fantine agreed.
'And another fifteen francs for extras,' called the man.
'You will have them,' said Fantine, assuming that she was talking to Mme Thenardiers husband. 'I have eighty francs.'
'Does the child have enough clothes?' the man asked.
'She has some beautiful clothes,' Fantine replied. 'Plenty of everything and silk dresses like a lady. They're all in my bag.'
The man's face finally appeared in the doorway.
'Then we agree to look after her for you,' he said.
The next morning, Fantine kissed her daughter goodbye and left for Montreuil, crying as if her heart would break.
'This money will be useful,'Thenardier said to his wife. 'Now I can pay off all my debts and stay out of prison. I'm proud of you. You set a very clever trap.'
'Without even intending to,' his wife replied.
One month later, Thenardier was short of money again, so he took Cosette's beautiful silk clothes to Paris and sold them for sixty francs. The couple dressed Cosette in rags and gave her very little food, which they made her eat from a wooden bowl under the table. The dog and the cat, who ate with her, were her only companions.
Fantine, meanwhile, found work in Montreuil and asked for news of her daughter every month. The Thenardiers always replied that she was in good health and very happy. At the end of the year, however, Thenardier was not happy with just seven francs a month; he demanded twelve and Fantine paid without protest, happy that her daughter was being well cared for.
The Thenardiers, who were loving and gentle to their own daughters, Eponine and Azelma, treated Cosette like a slave.
They made her get up before dawn every day and do all the dirty jobs around the house, while Eponine and Azelma wore pretty clothes and played with dolls. By the age of five, Cosette had become a thin, pale-faced, silent child. Misery had made her ugly and only her beautiful blue eyes remained.
The Thenardiers did not feel guilty about treating Cosette badly because Fantine had stopped sending them regular payments.
'The child is lucky to have a home at all,' they told everybody.
'Without us, she'd be living on the streets.'
When Fantine first arrived in Montreuil, she had immediately found work in a factory. She rented a small room, sent money regularly to the Thenardiers and, for a short time, was almost happy. She forgot many of her problems, and dreamt only of Cosette and her plans for the future. But her happiness did not last long. Although she was careful to say nothing about her daughter to anyone, other women at the factory soon discovered her secret. An unmarried woman with a child was a terrible thing in those days, and Fantine lost her job. She tried to find work as a servant, but no one would employ her. She finally managed to earn a little money sewing shirts, but she was unable to send money regularly to the Thenardiers.
That winter, Fantine saved money by not having a fire, and developed a small, dry cough. By the following winter, her debts had increased. The Thenardiers wrote her a frightening letter in which they told her that Cosette had no clothes, and that they needed ten francs immediately to buy her a new dress. Fantine, who did not have ten francs, but who was afraid that her daughter would freeze to death, went to the barber's shop. She took out her comb and let her blonde hair fall down to her waist.
'Such beautiful hair!' the barber said.
'How much will you give me for it?' Fantine asked.
'Ten francs.'
'Then cut it off.'
After selling her hair to the barber, Fantine was able to buy a woollen dress, which she sent to the Thenardiers. The Thenardiers, however, were very angry - they had wanted money, not clothes. They gave the dress to their daughter, Eponine, and Cosette went on shivering.
A few weeks later, Fantine received another letter from the Thenardiers. This time they wanted forty francs because Cosette was very ill and urgently needed medicine. Fantine felt desperate; she did not know how to obtain such a large sum of money. As she was wandering around the town, desperately trying to decide what to do, she noticed a crowd of people in the market square. She approached them without thinking, and discovered that they had gathered around a travelling dentist. Forgetting her troubles for a moment, she smiled at the dentist's humorous efforts to sell the people of Montreuil false teeth.
Suddenly the dentist saw her.
'You've got lovely teeth,' he said. 'If you sold me your two front teeth, I'd pay you forty francs.'
Fantine ran home, upset and disgusted. 'My hair will grow again,' she thought, 'but teeth would be gone forever.' But then she thought about her daughter, and her own appearance suddenly seemed unimportant. That evening, she visited the dentist at the inn where he was staying, and allowed him to remove her teeth.
Fantine could not sleep that night. She sat on her bed, cold and shivering, and looked at the two coins shining on the table. Then she gave a blood-stained smile. 'I'm happy,' she told herself. 'My baby isn't going to die.'
Fantine earned less and less money from her sewing, and the Thenardiers demanded more and more money to look after Cosette. Fantine spent whole nights crying. What could she do? She had sold her hair and her teeth; what else could she sell? And then she decided that she had no other choice: she would have to sell herself.
She became a prostitute.
Chapter three
Monsieur Madeleine
One winter's evening, a toothless woman with a grey face and flowers in her hair was arrested for attacking a man in the street. She was taken to the police station, where Inspector Javert, the chief of police, sent her to prison for six months.
'Please, M. Javert.' The woman fell to her knees. 'I owe a hundred francs. If I don't pay, my little girl will lose her home and be thrown out on to the streets. Please don't send me to prison.'
Javert listened to her coldly, then ordered a policeman to take her away. While the policeman was trying to drag her to her feet, however, a voice from the shadows said, 'One moment please.'
Javert looked up and saw Monsieur Madeleine, one of the most important people in the town.
M. Madeleine had arrived mysteriously in Montreuil one December evening in 1815. He had no money but he had a revolutionary idea: he knew a cheap and efficient method of manufacturing glass. Within a few months of his arrival, thanks to his new idea, the glass-making factory in Montreuil was making enormous profits. With the money he made, M. Madeleine built two new factories, which provided the town with hundreds of new jobs. He became a very wealthy man but lived a simple life, using most of his money to build new hospitals and schools. He was so popular that, in 1820, the townspeople elected him mayor of Montreuil.
There was one man, however, who did not like M. Madeleine. This was the chief of police, Inspector Javert.
He had always been suspicious of M. Madeleine, and was sure that he had seen him somewhere before, many years earlier. But he kept his suspicions to himself, not daring to say what he really believed: that M. Madeleine was, in fact, a dangerous criminal with a terrible past.
Now, years later, M. Madeleine was in the police station, trying to save Fantine from prison. Fantine, however, was not grateful. In fact, when she saw who it was, she spat at him.
'You own the factory where I used to work!' she shouted at him. 'I lost my job because of you. Now I've become a bad woman, but what choice did I have? I'll never get my daughter back if I don't make money.'
The mayor turned to Inspector Javert and said, in a soft, firm voice, 'This woman must be released.'
'That's impossible,' Javert replied. 'She attacked a man in the street, a respectable citizen. And now I've just seen her spit at you, the mayor of our town. A woman like this deserves to be punished.'
'But I saw what happened in the street just now,' M. Madeleine said. 'It was the man's fault, not this woman's. You should arrest him, not her.'
Javert argued with M. Madeleine for some time, but finally gave in. He walked angrily out of the room, leaving the mayor and the prostitute alone together. Fantine trembled, as confused as Javert had been. The man who had just saved her from prison was also the man who had caused all her troubles. The devil had suddenly decided to be kind, and she did not know what to think.
'I heard what you said,' M. Madeleine said to her. 'I honestly didn't know that you had lost your job, but I'll try to help you now. I'll pay your debts and arrange for your child to return to you. I'll give you all the money you need. I'll make you happy again. And I promise that, in the eyes of God, you have never been a bad woman.'
Fantine gazed at M. Madeleine with tears in her eyes. After all her pain and suffering she had, for the first time in her life, found kindness in another human being. At last she would be cared for, and she could look forward to a life of happiness with Cosette. Without a word, she fell to her knees and kissed the back of M. Madeleine's hand.
M. Madeleine sent the Thenardiers 300 francs and told them to send Cosette to Montreuil immediately. Thenardier, thinking that Fantine had suddenly become rich, wrote back and demanded 500 francs. M. Madeleine sent the money, but the Thenardiers found even more dishonest excuses for not sending Cosette back.
The weeks passed and, although she was happier than she had been for a long time, Fantine caught a fever. Months of poverty and misery had made her ill, and she soon became so weak that she was unable to leave her bed.
'When shall I see Cosette?' she kept asking M. Madeleine when he visited her.
'Very soon,' he would reply, and her pale face would light up with joy.
One morning, as M. Madeleine was making preparations to leave for Montfermeil and to fetch Cosette himself, he had a visitor. Inspector Javert walked into his office, and stood in silence waiting for him to look up from his work.
'Well, Javert, what is it?' M. Madeleine finally said.
'I've come to apologize, M. Madeleine,' the inspector replied.
'What are you talking about?'
'I've treated you unjustly. I was angry with you six weeks ago when you told me to release that woman. I wrote to the police headquarters in Paris and told them about you.'
'Told them what about me?'
'Forgive me, M. Madeleine, but I believed you were a man called Jean Valjean. He was a prisoner I saw twenty years ago, when I worked at a prison in Toulon. After being released from prison, this Valjean stole some silver from the Bishop of Digne and robbed a small boy on a public footpath. We tried to catch him, but he disappeared. When you arrived in Montreuil, I felt sure that you were this man, but now I know I was wrong, and I'm sorry. You will, of course, dismiss me from my job, as I've shown that I don't deserve your trust.'
M. Madeleine, looking hard at Javert without expression, said quietly, 'I'm afraid I don't understand.'
'The police headquarters in Paris told me that Jean Valjean was arrested last autumn for stealing apples,' Javert explained. He'd changed his name to Champmathieu and had lived for several years in the village of Ailly-le-Haut-Cloche. Two ex-prisoners from Toulon recognized him as Jean Valjean. I visited the man in Arras prison, and I saw for myself that he is indeed Jean Valjean. Of course, he denies everything, but that's not surprising. If he's found guilty of stealing from the bishop - who, as you know, died a couple of years ago - and of robbing the small boy, he'll spend the rest of his life in prison.'
M. Madeleine looked down at his papers.
'This matter is of no interest to me, Javert,' he said casually. 'I'm sure you have other work to do.'
'I was going to the man's trial in Arras tomorrow, 'Javert said. 'But after this conversation, you must dismiss me.'
M. Madeleine rose to his feet.
'Javert,' he said, 'you're an honourable man. You made one small mistake, that's all. I want you to continue your excellent work as inspector of police.'
He offered Javert his hand, but the inspector refused to take it. Instead, he said, 'I've behaved unjustly towards an innocent man. I cannot shake his hand.'
With those words he bowed and left the office, leaving M. Madeleine to stare at the papers on his desk with an empty, puzzled look in his eyes.
That afternoon, M. Madeleine visited Fantine. She had a high fever, and was coughing badly, but she still had only one thing on her mind.
'Cosette?' she asked him.
'Very soon,' he assured her.
He sat by her bed for an hour and then, having told the nurses to look after her, he returned to his home. He stayed awake all night, thinking of Javert's story about Champmathieu. The reader has probably already realized that M. Madeleine was really Jean Valjean, and M. Madeleine - as we shall continue to call him for this part of the story - knew that he could not let Champmathieu go to prison for crimes he had not committed. He knew - although he was not happy to admit this - that he would have to go to Arras and tell the truth. He would lose everything that he had worked so hard to achieve. He would also have to break his promise to Fantine about bringing Cosette from Montfermeil. But what choice did he have? The truth was more important than anything else.
The next morning, M. Madeleine set off on the long journey to Arras. It took him more than twelve hours, and when he arrived, he discovered that Champmathieu's trial had already started. The courtroom was full but, because he was such an important man, M. Madeleine was allowed to sit behind the judge's chair. He watched as several witnesses swore on the Bible that the man standing before the judge was Jean Valjean. Champmathieu, a large, simple-minded man, denied everything when his chance came to speak, but the crowd thought he was trying to be funny. The courtroom filled with laughter and Champmathieu began to laugh himself, which did him no good at all.
Finally, having heard all the evidence, the judge called for silence. He was preparing to announce his decision when M. Madeleine, pale and trembling, stood up and said:
'That man is not Jean Valjean.'
An excited whisper went around the courtroom as everybody recognized M. Madeleine.
M. Madeleine waited for the whispers to stop before announcing in a loud, clear voice that he was Jean Valjean. At first, no one believed him, but he managed to persuade the court by skilfully questioning each of the witnesses, revealing personal information that only the real Jean Valjean could have known. When he had persuaded the court of the truth of his confession, he was faced with a shocked but respectful silence.
'I must leave now,' M. Madeleine finally said. 'I have important business to attend to. You know where to find me, and I shall not try to escape.'
Everybody stood to one side to let him pass as he made his way towards the door. When he had gone, the judge immediately allowed Champmathieu to leave the court a free man. Champmathieu went home in a state of total confusion, thinking all men mad and understanding nothing of what had happened.
At dawn the next day, M. Madeleine entered Fantine's room.
'How is she?' he asked the nurse, who was watching her as she slept.
'She seems better. She's looking forward to seeing her child.'
'I haven't brought the child with me,' M. Madeleine said.
'Then what can we say to her when she wakes up?' The nurse looked suddenly worried. 'It will destroy her if she doesn't see her child now, after you promised to bring her.'
'God will guide me,' M. Madeleine sighed.
For some time M. Madeleine sat by the bedside and watched Fantine while she slept. She was breathing with great difficulty, but her face looked peaceful and calm. Suddenly, she opened her eyes and saw M. Madeleine.
'Cosette?' she asked, with a soft smile.
'Later,' M. Madeleine said gently, taking her hand. 'You're too weak to see her at the moment. First you must get well.'
Fantine smiled, and began to talk dreamily about her future life with her daughter, and how happy they would be together. But suddenly her face froze, and she stared with horror at the door. M. Madeleine, who was holding her hand, turned and saw Inspector Javert. Fantine, thinking that the inspector had come for her, gripped M. Madeleine's hand tightly and begged him to protect her.
'Don't be afraid.' M. Madeleine tried to calm her. 'He hasn't come for you.' Then, gently rising from his chair, he moved towards Javert. 'I know what you've come for,' he said quietly so that Fantine wouldn't hear. 'But give me three days, please. That's all I ask. Three days to fetch this unfortunate woman's child. I'll pay anything you like.'
'Do you think I'm stupid?' Javert gave an unpleasant laugh. 'Three days to escape, you mean.'
Fantine, who had heard what M. Madeleine said, despite his efforts to speak quietly, began to tremble.
'To fetch my child?' she cried. 'Isn't she here? Nurse, answer me... where's my little Cosette? I want to see her. M. Madeleine
'Be quiet, you dirty prostitute,' Javert interrupted her angrily. 'There is no Monsieur Madeleine. This man's name is Jean Valjean, and he's a criminal no better than you are. And you can forget all that nonsense about your child.
Fantine suddenly sat up. She stared wildly at the two men, then turned to the nurse. She looked as if she was going to speak, but no words came from her lips. Instead, with a small sigh, she fell back against her pillow and lay completely still.
Jean Valjean (as we must now call him) shook Javert's hand from his collar and ran to the bed. He gazed into Fantine's eyes and knew immediately that she was dead.
'You've killed her!' he cried angrily, turning to Javert with a fierce look in his eyes.
'I didn't come here to argue,' Javert said, stepping back nervously, afraid that Valjean was going to attack him. 'If you don't come with me now, I'll have to call my men.'
Valjean looked around the room, thinking for a second of making his escape. But the idea did not last for long. He turned again to Fantine and looked for one last time at her sad, pale face and empty, blue eyes. Bending down, he closed her eyes and pressed his lips against her forehead. Then he rose and turned back to Javert.
'I'm ready now,' he said.
News of M. Madeleine's arrest spread quickly around the town. Most people pretended not to be surprised. 'We always knew there was something strange about him,' they said. Two days after his arrest, Jean Valjean escaped from prison. The bars of his window had been broken during the night. Again, most people pretended not to be surprised. 'It takes more than a small town prison to hold a man as strong as that,' they all agreed.
Chapter four
The Man in the Long Yellow Coat
Christmas 1823 was especially lively and colourful in the village of Montfermeil. Entertainers and traders from Paris set up their stalls in the streets, and business at the Thenardiers' inn was very good. While guests and visitors ate and drank noisily, Cosette - now eight years old - sat in her usual place under the kitchen table. Dressed in rags, she knitted woollen stockings for Eponine and Azelma.
One evening, Madame Thenardier ordered Cosette out into the cold to fetch water. The nearest water supply was half-way down the wooded hill on which Montfermeil stood, and Cosette hated fetching water, especially in the dark. Miserably, she picked up a large, empty bucket that was almost as big as she was, and was walking with it to the door when Madame Thenardier stopped her.
'Buy some bread on the way,' she said, giving the girl some money.
Cosette took the coin, put it carefully in her pocket and left. She was cold and hungry as she dragged the bucket behind her along the crowded street, but she could not resist stopping in front of one of the stalls. It was like a palace to her, with its bright lights, shining glass and pretty objects. But the object that most attracted Cosette's attention was a large, golden-haired doll in a beautiful long pink dress. All the children in Montfermeil had gazed with wonder at this doll, but nobody in the village had enough money to buy it.
Cosette gazed at the doll for several minutes but, remembering her job, she sighed and continued on her way. She had soon left the colourful lights and the happy laughter of the village behind her, and was running down the hill into the frightening darkness of the wood. Finding the stream, she bent forward and began to till her bucket. She did not notice the coin that Mme Thenardier had given her for the bread fall out of her pocket into the water. When the bucket was full, she gripped the handle with her tiny, frozen hands and tried to pull it back up the hill. But the bucket was so heavy that, after a dozen steps, she had to stop for a rest. She managed a few more steps, and stopped again. Her progress became slower and slower. She was almost at the end of her strength, and she was still not out of the wood. Leaning against a tree, she cried aloud:
'Oh God help me! Please, dear God!'
Suddenly, an enormous hand reached down from the sky and took the bucket of water from her. Looking up, Cosette saw a huge, white-haired man standing next to her. He looked very strange with his tall black hat and long yellow coat.
'This is a very heavy bucket for such a small child,' he said gently, looking down at her from his great height.
For some reason, Cosette was not afraid. There was something about his eyes, tilled with a strange sadness, that she liked and trusted. She let him carry the bucket up the hill and, as they walked back towards the village, she told him everything about her life with the Thenardiers. The old man listened with great interest, and asked her many questions.
As they were approaching the inn, Cosette turned to him and said, 'May I have the bucket now? If Mme Thenardier sees that someone has been helping me, she'll beat me.'
The old man gave her the bucket, and they entered the inn together.
'What took you so long?' Mme Thenardier said angrily when she saw the little girl.
'This gentleman wants a room for the night,' Cosette said, trembling with fear, expecting to be beaten.
Mme Thenardier glanced at the old man without interest. She could tell from his clothes that he probably had no money.
'I'm sorry, the rooms are full,' she said.
'I can pay the price of a room,' the old man said.
'Forty sous,' Mme Thenardier replied (although the usual price was twenty).
'Forty sous,' the man agreed.
He sat down and Cosette, after serving him some wine, returned to her place under the table. But before she could start her knitting, she heard Mme Thenardier's angry voice demanding, 'Where's the bread I told you to get?'
Cosette, who had forgotten about the bread, came out from under the table.
'The baker's was shut,' she lied.
'Well, give me back the money.'
Cosette felt in her pocket and suddenly went pale. The coin was not there.
'I'm waiting,' Mme Thenardier said threateningly.
Cosette said nothing, speechless with fear as the woman raised her arm to hit her. But before she could deliver the blow the old man, who had seen everything, interrupted her.
'Madame, I've just noticed this on the floor. It must have fallen from the child's pocket.'
Mme Thenardier took the coin the old man held towards her and walked away.
At that moment the door opened and Eponine and Azelma appeared. They were two healthy girls, the old man noticed, dressed in warm clothes and with pink, healthy cheeks. After hugging and kissing their mother, they sat on the floor by the fire and played with a doll. Cosette, who had returned to her place under the table, looked up from her knitting and watched them sadly. A short time later, the girls grew bored with their game. They left the doll on the floor and went off to play with a baby cat. Cosette, checking that no one was watching, reached out and picked up the doll. She turned her back on the room and began to play with it, hoping that no one could see what she was doing. Her happiness did not last long, however. The two girls, when they saw Cosette with their doll, ran crying to their mother. Mme Thenardier rushed across the room towards Cosette who, afraid that she would be punished, put the doll gently on the floor and began to cry.
'What's the matter?' the old man said, rising to his feet.
'Can't you see?' Mme Thenardier said, red with anger. 'That nasty little girl, who isn't even my own daughter, who I feed and look after out of the kindness of my heart, has been playing with my daughters' doll.'
'I don't understand,' the old man said.
'She's touched it with her dirty hands!' Then, hearing Cosette crying, she turned to the little girl and shouted, 'Stop that noise!'
The old man left the inn and, minutes later, returned with something in his hands: the beautiful doll from the stall across the road.
'Here,' he said softly, placing it gently on the floor in front of Cosette. 'It's for you.'
There was a sudden silence in the room. Mme Thenardier, Eponine and Azelma stood absolutely still. The drinkers at the other tables paused, glasses half-way to their lips, and stared with disbelief.
'What kind of man is this?' they thought. 'He dresses so poorly but can afford to buy the most expensive doll in Montfermeil!'
The Thenardiers gave the old man their best room for the night. The next morning they gave him the bill, charging him three times the usual price for a meal and a bed for the night. They waited nervously while the man studied the bill carefully, expecting him to complain or cause trouble. Finally, he looked up from the bill without expression and said, 'Tell me, is business good here in Montfermeil?'
'Times are very hard,' Mme Thenardier replied immediately. 'This is a poor country. I don't know how we would manage without the occasional rich and generous traveller like yourself. We have so many expenses. That child, for instance - you've no idea how much she costs. We have our own daughters to look after. I can't afford to look after other people's children, too.'
'What would you say,' the old man said after a moment's thought, 'if I offered to take the child from you?'
'Oh!' Madame Thenardiers face brightened. 'That would be wonderful.'
'Just a minute,' her husband said. 'We love that child very much. It's true we're poor, and we have bad debts, but love is more important than money.'
'How much do you need?' the old man asked, taking an old leather wallet from the pocket of his coat.
'1500 francs,' Thenardier, who had already done his arithmetic, replied.
The old man put three 500-franc notes on the table and said, without smiling, 'Now fetch Cosette.'
When Cosette came downstairs, the old man gave her new clothes to wear: a black woollen dress, black stockings, scarf and shoes. Half an hour later, the people of Montfermeil saw an old man in a tall hat and long yellow coat walking along the road to Paris, hand-in-hand with a little girl dressed completely in black. No one knew the man. And, because she was carrying an expensive doll and was no longer wearing rags, not many recognized Cosette.
Cosette was leaving at last. She did not know where to, or with whom. But, as she held the old man's hand, she gazed wide-eyed at the sky. She had the strange but comforting feeling that she was somehow travelling closer to God.
Chapter four
Valjean and Cosette
Somewhere on the outskirts of Paris, Jean Valjean stopped outside a large, ancient building with damp walls. He took a key from the pocket of his long yellow coat and opened the old wooden door. He then carried Cosette, who was sleeping in his arms, along a dark corridor and up some stairs to the room he had rented since his escape from Montreuil. There was not much furniture in the room - just an old bed, a mattress on the floor, a table, some chairs and a lighted stove. A streetlamp shone through the only window, lighting the dark interior of the room.
Valjean laid Cosette on the bed without waking her. He lit a candle and sat by the bed, watching her while she slept. He felt sad that Fantine had not lived to see her child again, but happy that he had been able to rescue her child from the terrible Thenardiers. He bent and kissed the sleeping child's forehead just as, nine months earlier, he had kissed her mother's.
The next morning, Cosette opened her eyes and immediately started to get out of bed.
'I'm coming, Madame,' she yawned, blinded by the bright winter's sunlight that was shining into the room.
Then, as her eyes adjusted to the light, she saw the kind old face of Jean Valjean looking down at her, and she relaxed.
'Of course!' she cried with joy. 'It's all true. I was afraid that it was just a dream.'
She hugged her doll and asked Valjean hundreds of questions. Finally, she asked him, 'Do you want me to sweep the floor?'
'No,' he said. 'I just want you to enjoy yourself.'
The December days passed in great happiness for Cosette and for Jean Valjean, too. For twenty-five years he had been alone in the world. Nothing had ever touched his heart until he had rescued Cosette. Now, he discovered the greatest joy he had ever known by just standing beside her bed and looking at her innocent, trusting little face. He had discovered love.
After escaping from Montreuil, Jean Valjean had taken all his money from the bank and buried it in a forest near Montfermeil. Although he was rich, he had chosen a room in a poor part of Paris, where nobody would find him. His only neighbour was an old woman, who did his housework and kept his stove burning. Paying her six months in advance, he told her that he was a ruined Spanish gentleman, and that the little girl was his granddaughter.
Weeks passed, and the two lived happily. Valjean gave Cosette lessons in reading and writing, and spent hours watching her as she dressed and undressed her doll. To avoid being seen, he never went out during the day. He walked for a couple of hours every evening, sometimes alone, sometimes with Cosette. He often gave money to beggars, which was unwise, because he soon became known in the area as 'the beggar who gives money to beggars'.
One evening, towards the end of winter, Valjean gave some money to a beggar sitting under a streetlamp outside a church. The beggar raised his face and stared hard at Valjean for just a second, then quickly bowed his head. This gave Valjean a shock. Although he had only seen the beggar's face for a second, it had seemed strangely familiar.
'I'm going mad,' he thought, as he walked home.
The next evening he returned to the steetlamp outside the church. The beggar was still there, in the same position, wearing the same clothes. This time, Valjean spoke to him as he gave him some money. The beggar laughed and joked with him, and Valjean returned that evening a happier man.
'I must have been dreaming yesterday,' he laughed to himself. 'But for a second, there was something about the beggars eyes that reminded me of Javert. How could I have thought such a thing? After speaking to him this evening, I can see that he doesn't look like the inspector at all.'
A few evenings later, while he was giving Cosette a reading lesson in his room, Valjean heard the front door of the house open and close. This was unusual. The old woman, the only other person who lived in the building, always went to bed before nightfall. Valjean signalled to Cosette to keep quiet. Someone was coming up the stairs. He blew out the candle and, just as he was kissing Cosette on the forehead, the footsteps stopped. Valjean did not move. He sat in his chair with his back to the door and held his breath. A few minutes later, having heard only silence, he turned round. A light was shining through a crack in his door. Someone with a candle was standing outside his room.
Several minutes passed, and then the light disappeared. Valjean quietly lay down on the mattress on his floor, but he could not close his eyes all night. At daybreak, as he was falling asleep at last, he heard footsteps in the corridor outside his room again. Running to the door, he put his eye to the large keyhole and saw the back view of a man who was walking towards the stairs. A tall man in a long coat with a stick under his arm.
Valjean's heart almost stopped beating and he began to sweat.
'Javert,' he breathed to himself.
Valjean spent all day making preparations to leave. It was too dangerous for him and Cosette to stay there another night. That evening, he went downstairs and looked up and down the street. It seemed empty, although he could not see into the shadows behind the trees. He went back upstairs for Cosette, who was waiting for him patiently, holding her doll.
'Come along,' he said. 'It's time to leave.'
Cosette took his hand, and went with him down the stairs.
There was a full moon, and this pleased Valjean as he moved quickly along the narrow streets. By keeping close to the walls in the shadows, he could clearly see what was happening in the light. After a while, he felt confident that he and Cosette were not being followed. But, as the church bells of the city struck eleven o'clock, something made him look back. In the light of a lamp above a doorway, he saw four men moving along the street in his direction. He gripped Cosette's hand and began to walk more quickly. Every few minutes, he stopped in the shadows of a doorway or at the corner of a street to look back. The four men were still following him. He could see their faces clearly in the moonlight, and one of them belonged to Inspector Javert.
By now, Cosette was exhausted. Valjean picked her up and ran with her through a confusing system of alleys until he came to a bridge. On the other side of the river, he stopped at the entrance of a high-walled alley and looked back. He could see four figures in the distance on the far side of the bridge.
Walking more slowly now, thinking he was safe from his pursuers, Valjean followed the alley until he came to a lane that seemed to lead away from the city. He walked along this lane for a long time until, to his horror, he discovered his way blocked by a high wall. There was no way forward, but as he was turning back, he saw movements in the distance and the flash of moonlight on metal. Seven or eight soldiers were moving slowly along the lane in his direction.
Valjean looked desperately for an escape from the alley, but could see none. On one side of him was a tall building, all its doors and windows covered with metal bars. On the other side there was a wall, higher than a tree. He would be able to climb the wall on his own, but how could he carry Cosette? Suddenly, he had an idea. He ran to a nearby streetlight and pulled some wire from a metal box at its base. He tied one end of the wire around Cosette's waist, climbed the wall and, with great difficulty, pulled the girl up behind him. He was only just in time. There was a tree on the other side of the wall, and Valjean carried Cosette down into its branches just as the soldiers arrived.
'He must be here!' He heard Javert's voice clearly on the other side of the wall. 'He can't have escaped. There's no way out!'
At last, the soldiers gave up their search and went back in the direction they had come. Valjean hugged Cosette tightly with relief, knowing that at last they were both safe.
Chapter six
Marius
On the night after the Battle of Waterloo, in June 1815, a robber moved quietly around the battlefield, stealing money and jewellery from the bodies of dead soldiers. He saw a hand sticking out from a pile of dead men and horses, a gold ring on its middle finger, shining in the moonlight. The robber took the ring but, as he turned to leave, the hand grabbed his jacket. The robber pulled the body from the pile of bodies and saw that he had rescued a French officer. The man had a terrible wound in his head, but he was still alive.
'Thank you,' the officer whispered. 'You've saved my life. What's your name?'
'Thenardier,' the robber replied.
'I shall not forget that name,' the officer replied. 'And you must remember mine. My name's Pontmercy.'
Without another word, the robber took the wounded man's watch and purse, and disappeared into the night.
Georges Pontmercy was married with a young son. He survived the Battle of Waterloo but unfortunately, in the same year, his wife died. His father-in-law, M. Gillenormand, was a very wealthy man, but the two men hated each other. M. Gillenormand hated everybody who liked Napoleon. He thought that Pontmercy was no better than a beggar, a penniless adventurer who only wanted his money. Pontmercy thought that M. Gillenormand was an old fool. When his daughter died, M. Gillenormand made Pontmercy an offer which he could not refuse.
'You have no money, and I am rich,' he said. 'If you want to keep your son, Marius, I'll give you no money. But if you give the boy to me, and promise never to see him again, I'll look after him.'
Pontmercy, wanting his son to have a good life, had sadly given him to M. Gillenormand and never saw his son or father-in-law again.
Marius grew up with his grandfather, and never knew his father. M. Gillenormand always told him that his father had been no good - that he was a poor soldier and a drunk who had abandoned him after his mother's death. For many years, Marius believed this, but when he was seventeen years old, he learnt the truth. His father, a brave officer who had fought for Napoleon and nearly died at the Battle of Waterloo, had really loved him and his mother very much. Without telling his grandfather, Marius tried to contact his father and finally discovered where he was living. He went at once to visit him, but he was too late. His father had just died. A poor man, Georges Pontmercy had left his son nothing apart from a letter:
For my son. My life was saved at Waterloo by a sergeant. His name was Thenardier. I believe that he recently managed a small inn in the village of Montfermeil, not far from Paris. If you ever find this man, I want you to help him in any way you can.
Marius returned to Paris, but continued to visit his father's grave regularly, without telling his grandfather. One day, however, his grandfather discovered what he was doing. They had a big quarrel, and M. Gillenormand ordered Marius to leave his house.
For the next three years, Marius lived in a small room in an old, damp-walled building on the outskirts of Paris - the same room that Valjean and Cosette had lived in eight years earlier. He gave up studying law and earned his living by working in a bookshop and helping to write dictionaries. He did not earn very much money, but it was enough for the rent and simple meals. He rarely bought new clothes, but he was proud of the fact that he had never been in debt. His grandfather often tried to send him money, but Marius always returned it. He hated his grandfather for the unjust, cruel way he had treated his poor father. Life was hard for him, but he never forgot the promise he had made his father: that he would find Thenardier, the man who had saved his father's life, and help him in any way he could.
Marius was a handsome young man, but he was also extremely shy. When girls looked at him and smiled, he thought they were laughing at his old clothes. In fact, they were attracted by his good looks, but he was not confident enough to realize this. As a result, he had no girlfriend, but he was happy with his books.
'You shouldn't stay alone all the time,' his good friend, Enjolras, said to him. 'You should get out more. Give the girls a chance. They'd be good for you, Marius. Otherwise you'll turn into a priest!'
Marius paid little attention to his friend, and continued his quiet life of work, study and daily walks.
While walking around his part of the city, Marius had noticed in elderly man and a young girl in the Luxembourg Gardens. They always sat next to each other on the same bench. The man, who was perhaps sixty, had white hair and a serious but friendly-looking face. The girl, who was aged thirteen or fourteen, always wore the same badly-cut black dress. She was very thin, almost ugly, but Marius noticed that she had lovely blue eyes. They seemed to be father and daughter.
Marius saw this couple frequently on his regular walks in the Gardens. But, although he was very interested in them, they seemed not to notice him at all. The girl was always talking happily, while the man said very little. He just looked at the girl from time to time with an affectionate, fatherly smile.
Enjolras had often seen the couple, too.
'Do you know who they are?' Marius asked him one day.
'I call the man M. Leblanc, because of his white hair, and the girl Mile Lanoire, because of her black dress,' his friend replied.
For almost a year, Marius saw the old man and the young girl daily in the same place at the same time. Then, for some reason, Marius stopped going to the Luxembourg Gardens. When he returned, one summer morning six months later, he saw the same couple sitting on the same bench, but something amazing had happened. The man was the same, but the thin, plain girl of six months earlier had become a beautiful young woman. Her rough black dress had been replaced by one of fine black silk. She had soft brown hair, pale, smooth skin, deep blue eyes and a lovely smile that lit up her face like sunshine.
She looked up when Marius passed for the second time, and gave him a casual glance. Marius, however, walked on, thinking of other things. For the next few days he passed the bench in the Gardens without looking at her. Then one day, as he was passing, thinking about nothing in particular, the girl looked up at him and their eyes met. A second later she looked away and Marius walked on but, in a strange way, he knew his life had changed. What he had experienced in that moment was not the honest, innocent gaze of a child. It was something more than that. Whatever it was, Marius sensed that, after that moment, his life would never be the same.
The next day, Marius returned to the Luxembourg Gardens wearing his best clothes. He walked around slowly, stopping to look at the ducks on the lake, then casually approached the bench where Mile Lanoire and her father were sitting. As he walked past, he kept his eyes fixed on the girl, but she did not seem to notice him. She was talking quietly to her father, and Marius could hear the soft, exciting murmur of her voice. Without intending to, he stopped, turned round and walked past the bench again. He felt his face go red and his heart beat loudly in his chest. He was sure, this time, that she had watched him as he passed. He did not go back a third time, but sat down on a bench at the opposite end of the Gardens. He looked at the girl out of the corner of his eye. She seemed to fill the far end of the Gardens with a kind of blue mist. Taking a deep breath, he rose and was going to pass the bench for a third time when he stopped. He suddenly realized that, in his feverish state, he had forgotten about the old man. What would he be thinking when he saw a strange young man walking backwards and forwards in front of his bench? Without another thought, Marius left the Gardens and went home.
He returned the next morning and sat on a bench all day, pretending to read a book, not daring to go near the bench where the girl and her father were sitting. He did the same every day for two weeks. Towards the end of the second week, while Marius was sitting in his usual place, he looked up from his book. And his face went pale. Something had happened at the far end of the Gardens. M. Leblanc and his daughter had risen from their bench and were slowly walking in his direction. Marius shut his book, opened it again and made an effort to read. When he felt that they were near him, he looked up and saw that the girl was looking steadily at him with a soft, thoughtful gaze that made him tremble from head to foot.
He gazed after her until she had disappeared from sight, then rose to his feet and walked around, laughing and talking to himself. Finally he left the Gardens in the mad hope of seeing her in the street, but instead he met Enjolras, who invited him to a meal.
Every day for the next month, Marius went to the Luxembourg Gardens, excited by knowing that the girl was secretly looking at him, but too shy and embarrassed to know what to do. He avoided walking directly in front of the bench, partly from shyness, partly because he did not want to attract her father's attention. Sometimes he stood for half an hour in a place where her father could not see him, looking at her and enjoying the small, secret smiles she sent him.
But it seemed that M. Leblanc had begun to suspect what was happening because often, when Marius appeared, he got to his feet and walked away, taking his daughter with him. Sometimes M. Leblanc took his daughter to a different bench, to see if Marius would follow them. Marius failed to understand the trick, and made the mistake of doing so. Then M. Leblanc became irregular in his visits and did not always bring his daughter with him. When this happened, Marius did not stay in the Gardens, which was another mistake.
Marius was too much in love to think clearly. His desire for the girl was growing daily, and he dreamt of her every night. One evening, he found a handkerchief lying on the bench which M. Leblanc and his daughter had just left. It was a plain, white handkerchief with the initials U.F. in one corner.
'Ursula.' Marius said the first name that came into his head. 'A delicious name!'
He kissed the handkerchief, breathed in its perfume, wore it next to his heart by day and kept it under his pillow at night.
'I can feel her whole soul in it!' he told himself
In fact, the handkerchief belonged to M. Leblanc and had simply fallen out of his pocket, but Marius was unaware of this. He never appeared in the Luxembourg Gardens without the handkerchief pressed to his lips or his heart. The girl could not understand his behaviour at all, and looked at him with a puzzled expression.
'Such modesty!' Marius sighed.
Eventually, Marius was not satisfied with just knowing the girl's name; he wanted to know where she lived. He found that she lived in a small house at the quiet end of the rue de l'Ouest. As well as the joy of seeing her in the Gardens, he now had the pleasure of following her home. One evening, having followed them to the house and watched them enter, he went in after them and spoke to the concierge. The concierge, however, became suspicious, thinking that Marius was connected with the police, and refused to say anything.
The following day, M. Leblanc and his daughter did not come to the Gardens at all. They did not come for a whole week, and Marius began to feel depressed. Every night he stood outside their house and gazed up at their lighted windows. Sometimes he saw a shadow pass in front of a lamp, and his heart beat faster.
On the eighth night there was no light in the windows. Marius waited, his heart aching with pain, until finally going home. The next day they did not go to the Gardens, so again Marius went to the house as night was falling. Once again, there were no lights in the windows. He knocked on the door and spoke to the concierge.
'Where's the old gentleman?' he asked.
'He's left.'
Marius felt the blood leave his face. Almost fainting, he asked in a weak voice, 'When did he leave?'
'Yesterday.'
'Where has he gone?'
'I've no idea.'
'Did he leave an address?'
The concierge then recognized Marius from the previous week. He stared fiercely at him and said, 'So, it's you again! I was right. You are some kind of policeman.'
With those words he slammed the door in Marius's face.
Chapter seven
The Jondrettes
Summer and autumn passed, and winter came, but Marius saw no sign of M. Leblanc or 'Ursula'. He searched everywhere for them, but without success. He became like a homeless dog, wandering the streets in a mood of dark despair. Without 'Ursula', his life had become meaningless, work disgusted him, walking tired him, solitude bored him.
'If only I hadn't followed them home,' he told himself. 'It gave me so much happiness just to look at her, and now, through my stupidity, I've lost even that.'
Enjolras and his other friends tried to cheer him up by taking him to exciting places, but these expeditions always ended in the same way: Marius would leave the group and walk around the streets of Paris unhappily on his own.
One cold but sunny afternoon in February, Marius was walking along the street when two young girls dressed in rags ran into him. One was tall and thin, the other smaller. From what they were shouting at each other, he understood that they were running from the police. He stood for a moment staring after them as they disappeared round a corner. Then he noticed a small parcel of papers lying on the ground.
Realizing that one of the girls must have dropped it, he picked it up and called after them, but it was too late. The girls had already disappeared from sight. With a sigh, he put the package in his pocket and went on to dinner.
That night at home, Marius opened the package and found that it contained four letters, all addressed to different people, and smelling strongly of cheap tobacco. Marius read the four letters and discovered that they were all asking for money. However, there was something strange about them: although they all seemed to be written by different people, they were written on the same rough paper in the same handwriting. He also noticed that each of them had similar spelling mistakes. Thinking no more about it, he wrapped the letters up again, threw them into a corner and went to bed.
The next morning, while he was working, there was a gentle knock on his door.
'Come in,' Marius said, expecting it to be the concierge, Mme Bougon. But the voice that answered, saying, 'I beg your pardon, Monsieur,' was not that of Mme Bougon. It was more like the voice of a sick old man.
Marius looked up quickly and saw that his visitor was a thin girl wearing just a skirt and shirt. She looked cold and ill, and when she spoke, Marius saw that she had lost several of her teeth. There was, however, still a trace of beauty in the sixteen-year-old lace, like pale sunlight beneath the thick clouds of a winter's dawn. Marius rose to his feet, sure that he had seen the girl somewhere before.
'What can I do for you, Mademoiselle?' he asked.
'I've got a letter for you, M. Marius.'
Marius opened the letter and read:
My warm-hearted neighbour, I have heard of how you kindly paid my rent for me six months ago. I thank you for it. But my eldest daughter will tell you that my wife is sick and none of us have had any food for four days. Please, Monsieur, show us the kindness of your generous heart again. My daughter is at your service. Yours truly, Jondrette.
Marius realized at once that the handwriting, the yellow paper and the smell of cheap tobacco was the same as in the four letters he had read the previous evening. He now had five letters, all the work of one author: the man who lived with his family in the next room.
The Jondrette family had been Marius's neighbours for many months, but he had never before paid much attention to them. This was why he had failed to recognize the two daughters when they had run into him on the street. But now he understood that Jondrette's business was writing dishonest letters, asking for money from people he imagined were wealthier than himself.
Marius looked up from the letter and watched the girl moving fearlessly around his room, studying the furniture and the mirror on the wall. Her eyes lit up when she noticed the books on his writing desk.
'Books!' she said, and then added with pride, 'I know how to read and write. Look, I'll show you.'
Picking up a pen that lay on the table, she wrote on a piece of paper, Be careful! The police are coming! She showed Marius her work and then, changing the subject quickly, for no reason at all, she gazed into his eyes and said shyly, 'Do you know, M. Marius, that you're a very handsome boy?'
Approaching him, she rested a cold red hand on his shoulder and said, 'You never notice me, M. Marius, but I know you. I see you on the stairs, and I see you walking around the streets, looking so sad and alone.'
Marius's cheeks went red. He moved away from the girl's touch and said, 'I think, Mademoiselle, that I have something belonging to you.' He handed her the parcel of letters.
She clapped her hands and cried, 'We've been looking for that everywhere! How did you know they were mine? Of course, the handwriting. You were the man we ran into last night.'
While she talked excitedly, she took out one of the letters. 'Ah, this is for the old man who goes to church every day. If I hurry, I might be able to catch him. Perhaps he'll give me enough for a dinner. We haven't eaten for three days... '
Marius took a five-franc piece from his pocket and handed it to the girl.
'The sun's come out at last!' she cried, eagerly accepting the coin. 'That's enough food for two days. You're a real gentleman, Monsieur.'
With those words, she gave a little laugh and wave, grabbed some dry bread from the table and disappeared out of the door.
Marius had lived for five years without much money, but he had never been really poor. Now, after his conversation with the girl from the next room, he understood what real poverty was. Only a thin wall separated him from the family of lost souls in the room next door. He had heard them and seen them, but had paid them no attention, and he suddenly felt guilty.
'If they had had another neighbour,' he thought, 'one who had noticed their suffering, perhaps they could have been rescued by now.'
As Marius was thinking about the sad life of the family in the next room, he stared dreamily at the wall that separated them. Then, in the top corner near the ceiling, Marius saw that there was a triangular hole.
'Let's see what these people are really like,' Marius thought. 'Then I'll be in a better position to help them.'
He stood on a cupboard, put his eye to the hole, and looked through it into his neighbours' room.
The Jondrettes' room was dirty and evil-smelling, unlike Marius's bare but clean room. Its only furniture was a chair, an old table, some cracked dishes and two dirty beds, one on each side of a fireplace. A man with a long, grey beard was sitting at the table, writing a letter and smoking a pipe. A large woman with greying hair, once red, was sitting by the fire, while a thin, pale-faced child sat on one of the beds.
Marius, depressed at what he saw, was going to get down from the cupboard when the door of the Jondrettes' room opened and the elder girl came in. Slamming the door shut behind her she cried victoriously, 'He's coming!'
'Who's coming?' Her father looked up.
'The old man who goes to church. He's following me. I saw him with his daughter in the church, and gave him the letter. He said he would follow me here. I ran ahead to tell you he'll be here in two minutes.'
'You're a good girl,' the man said, rising quickly to his feet. Then, turning to his wife, he said, 'Quickly! Put out the fire!' While she poured water on the flames, the man broke the chair with his foot and told his younger daughter to break a window. She put her fist through the glass and ran to her bed, crying because her arm was covered in blood.
'Excellent,' her father smiled, tearing a piece off his shirt and using it as a bandage. 'Now we're ready for the kind gentleman. When he sees how miserable we are, he'll give us a lot of money, you'll see.'
Moments later, there was a gentle knock on the door. Jondrette rushed to open it, bowing almost to the ground as he did so.
'Please come in, my dear sir! Please enter, with your charming young lady.'
An elderly man and a young girl appeared in the doorway and Marius, still looking through the hole in the wall, could not believe his eyes.
It was She.
She! Everyone who has ever loved will feel the force of that small word. In the bright mist that clouded his vision, Marius could hardly see the features of the sweet face that had lit his life for six months and had then disappeared, filling his life with darkness. And now the vision had reappeared!
When Marius had recovered some of his senses, he saw that she seemed a little paler than before. Her companion as usual was M. Leblanc. As she entered the room, she put a large parcel on the table.
'Monsieur, you will find some woollen stockings and blankets in the parcel,' M. Leblanc told Jondrette.
'You are extremely generous, Monsieur,' Jondrette said, again bowing to the ground. 'But as you can see, we are unfortunate in many ways. We are without food, Monsieur, and without heating. No warmth for my unhappy children. Our only chair is broken. A broken window - in this weather! My wife ill in bed and our younger daughter injured.'
'Oh, the poor child,' 'Ursula' said, seeing the girl's bleeding wrist.
'She had an accident in the machine-shop where she works for six sous an hour, 'Jondrette explained. 'They may have to cut off her arm.'
The daughter, taking her father's words seriously, began to scream with fear. While M. Leblanc and 'Ursula' tried to comfort her, Jondrette approached his wife and said in a whisper, 'Take a good look at that man.'
He then returned to M. Leblanc and told him about his debts.
'I owe sixty francs in rent,' he said.
M. Leblanc took a coin out of his pocket and put it on the table.
'Five francs is all I have with me,' he said. 'But I'll take my daughter home and come back this evening with more money for you.'
Jondrette accompanied M. Leblanc and 'Ursula' out of the door and, after a few minutes' indecision, Marius jumped down from the cupboard and ran out into the street. But he was too late; their carriage had already gone. Miserably, he turned back to the house. He went into his room, pushing the door behind him, but the door would not shut. Turning, Marius saw that a hand was holding it open.
'What is it?' he demanded.
It was the Jondrette girl.
'So it's you again,' he said almost fiercely. 'What do you want now?'
She did not reply but stood thoughtfully looking at him, seeming to have lost all her earlier confidence. She had not entered the room, but was still standing in the half-light of the corridor.
'What do you want?' Marius repeated angrily.
'M. Marius,' she said at last, a faint light in her sad eyes, 'you seem upset. What's the matter?'
'Nothing. Now please leave me alone.' Marius tried again to shut the door, but she still held it open.
'You're making a mistake,' she said. 'You aren't rich, but you were generous this morning. You've been kind to us - now I want to be kind to you. Is there anything that I can do?'
Marius considered her offer, then had an idea. Moving closer to her, he said, 'Do you know the address of those people who've just left your room?'
'No.'
'Can you find out for me?'
'Is that what you want?' she said, a disappointed look on her face.
'Yes.'
The girl looked hard at him for a minute.
'What will you give me?' she said at last.
'Anything you want.'
'Anything?'
'Yes.'
'Then I'll get it.'
She left immediately, closing the door behind her.
Marius sat down and buried his face in his hands, too overcome by emotion to think clearly. But then he heard a loud voice from the next room.
'I tell you I'm sure.' Jondrette was speaking to his wife. 'I recognized him.'
Without another thought, Marius jumped on to the cupboard and looked again through the hole in the wall.
'Really?' His wife looked puzzled. 'Are you sure?'
'Of course I'm sure. It's been eight years, but I recognized him at once.'
He told the two girls to leave the room and then, when alone with his wife, he said, 'And I recognized the girl too. I'm surprised you didn't.'
'Why should I? I've never seen her'
But Jondrette bent down and whispered something in her ear. Straightening up, he said, 'Now do you recognize her?'
'Her?' said the woman, her voice filled with sudden hatred. 'Are you sure? That's impossible!' she cried. 'Our daughters barefoot and without a dress between them, while she wears leather boots and a fur coat? You must be wrong. You've forgotten, that child was ugly, and this one's not bad-looking.'
'I tell you, it's the same girl. You'll see. And I'll tell you another thing. She's going to make us a fortune. I'm tired of being poor. We deserve a better life, and this is our chance.'
'What do you mean?'
'He said he'll be here at six o'clock, with sixty francs. I'll bring some friends round, and we'll make sure he gives us a lot more money.'
'What will you do if he doesn't give you more money?'
Jondrette stroked his beard and laughed. 'We'll know what to do about it.' And then, as he was going to leave the room, he turned to his wife and said, 'You know, it's lucky he didn't recognize me. If he had, he wouldn't be coming back here again. It's the beard that saved me - my lovely, long, romantic beard!'
With an ugly laugh, he pulled his cap down over his eyes and left the room.
Although Marius was a dreamer and not a man of action, he knew immediately that he had to save M. Leblanc and 'Ursula' from the trap that Jondrette was setting for them. But what could he do? He could not warn M. Leblanc because he did not know the old man's address. There was only one thing to do: he had to tell the police.
Half an hour later, Marius was at the nearest police station.
The desk clerk showed him into the police chief's office, where a tall man with a wide face and a thin, tight mouth was trying to keep warm next to a tire.
'Are you the chief of police?' Marius asked.
'He's away,' the tall man said. 'I'm Inspector Javert. Now, what do you want?'
Marius told Javert about the morning's events. When he told Javert his address, he noticed the inspector's eyes light up with great interest. Then, when everything had been explained, Javert thought for a moment. Finally, he asked Marius for his door key and told him to go home and hide quietly in his room so that his neighbours would think he was out.
'Take these with you,' the inspector went on, producing two small guns. 'When the old man and the girl arrive, let them start their business. When you think it's getting dangerous, shoot one of these guns. After that, I'll take charge.'
Back in his room, Marius sat down nervously on his bed. It was nearly six o'clock. Outside it had stopped snowing, and a full moon was growing steadily brighter above the mist. Suddenly, he heard voices. Taking off his boots, he quietly climbed on to the cupboard and looked through the hole in the wall. A fire burned in the corner of the room, filling it with blood-red light. Jondrette, who had just come in, was shaking snow from his shoes.
'Everything's arranged,' he said. 'Has the concierge gone out?'
'Yes,' his wife said.
'And you're sure he's not in next door?'
'Positive.'
'Good.' Then he turned to his daughters. 'Now, you two must go and keep guard in the street, one by the gate, one at the street corner.'
'A fine job!' the elder girl called back. 'Keeping guard barefoot in the snow.'
'Tomorrow you'll have fur boots!' her father called out after her.
A few minutes later, there was nobody in the building except for Marius and the Jondrettes. Marius watched as Jondrette put a metal bar in the fire and inspected a rope ladder on the table. Next, he opened a drawer, took out a long knife and tested its blade with his finger. Suddenly, at exactly six o'clock, the door into the Jondrettes' room opened.
'Welcome, Monsieur, 'Jondrette said, rising to his feet.
M. Leblanc appeared and put four coins on the table. 'That is for your rent and food, Monsieur,' he said. 'Now we must discuss what else is needed.'
Jondrette quietly told his wife to dismiss the carriage, and when she had left the room, turned back to his visitor.
'How is the wounded child?' M. Leblanc asked him.
'Not well.' Jondrette smiled sadly. 'She's in great pain. Her sister has taken her to hospital, but they'll be back soon.'
The conversation continued politely in this way for several minutes. M. Leblanc asked Jondrette about his circumstances, and Jondrette smiled sadly as he invented lie after lie. Finally, Jondrette picked up a large picture that was leaning against the wall, and showed it to M. Leblanc.
'What's that?' M. Leblanc said, looking at the badly-drawn picture of a soldier in uniform.
'It's a work of art,' Jondrette informed him. 'I love this picture as much as I love my two daughters. But, unfortunately, I have to sell it. What do you think it's worth?'
'It's just an old inn-sign. It's worth about three francs.'
'I'll accept a thousand,' Jondrette softly replied.
M. Leblanc rose and, standing with his back to the wall, looked quickly round the room. Jondrette was on his left, his wife was standing on his right near the door. Jondrette put the picture down and stepped quietly towards the old man.
'You don't recognize me, do you?' he said in a loud, clear voice.
At this signal, which he had pre-arranged with his friends, three men armed with metal poles rushed into the room. M. Leblanc grew pale, and gripped the back of the broken chair with his huge hands. Marius, meanwhile, raised his right hand with the gun, ready to fire the warning shot.
'The carriage is ready?' Jondrette asked the three men.
'Yes, with two good horses,' one of them replied.
'Excellent.' He turned to M. Leblanc and repeated his earlier question. 'You still don't recognize me, do you?'
'No.'
'My name isn't Jondrette. It's Thenardier. Now do you recognize me?'
M. Leblanc trembled slightly, but still shook his head. Marius, however, who had been going to fire the gun as a signal for the police to arrive, shook so much that he almost fell off the cupboard.
'Thenardier,' he thought. 'That's the name of the man who saved my father's life at the Battle of Waterloo. The man I've promised to help!'
If he fired the warning shot, M. Leblanc would be saved and Thenardier would be destroyed. But he would also have broken his promise to his father. He felt his knees grow weak. What should he do?
Thenardier walked up and down in front of M. Leblanc.
'Do you remember the little inn in Montfermeil eight years ago? You took away our Cosette, do you remember? Wearing that old yellow coat, pretending you were a tramp! Well, now you're going to learn that you can't make things right by just bringing a few hospital blankets! You're the cause of all my troubles. For 1500 francs you took away a girl who was bringing me lots of money.'
'I don't know what you're talking about,' M. Leblanc said. 'I don't know who you are, but I know what you are. You're a dirty criminal.'
'A criminal?' Thenardier said, suddenly angry. 'That's what you rich people call people like me, isn't it? Just because I've failed in business. I was a war hero, you know - I saved an officer's life at Waterloo! And you call me a criminal! Well, I'm going to teach you a lesson.'
He began to move towards M. Leblanc, but the old man was too quick for him. With surprising speed, he pushed the table and chair to one side and ran to the window. He managed to open it but, before he could jump, the three men jumped on him and held him to the floor.
This was too much for Marius.
'Forgive me, father,' he murmured, preparing to fire the gun.
But suddenly Thenardier cried, 'Don't hurt him!'
After a long fight, M. Leblanc was tied up and taken to the bed.
'No wallet?' Thenardier cried, having searched his pockets. 'Never mind.' He sat on the bed next to the helpless but brave old man, and said, 'Let's discuss things quietly. All I'm asking for is 200,000 francs. I realize that you don't have the money with you now, but I want you to write a letter. I'll tell you what to say.'
He untied M. Leblanc's right hand and, producing a pen and paper, began:
My dearest daughter, You must come at once. I need you urgently.
The person who gives you this note will bring you to me. I shall be waiting.
M. Leblanc signed his name Urbain Fabre, which seemed to satisfy Thenardier, and wrote an address on the envelope. Thenardier then took the letter and gave it to his wife.
'There's a carriage outside. Don't be long.'
Nearly half an hour passed. Thenardier seemed lost in his own dark thoughts. The prisoner did not move. Finally, there was the sound of horses in the street outside and, moments later, the door to the room was thrown open.
'It's a false address,' Mme Thenardier cried. 'There's no Urbain Fabre. The old man's been lying to us!'
Thenardier sat on the corner of the table in silence for some moments, swinging his leg and gazing with a fierce satisfaction at the fire. Then he turned to the prisoner and said in a slow, threatening voice, 'What did you hope to gain by giving me a false name and address?'
'Time!' cried the prisoner in a loud voice, jumping from the bed, having secretly cut the ropes that tied him. Before the others in the room could react, M. Leblanc was standing by the fire, holding a metal bar above his head.
'I'm not afraid of you,' he said. 'But neither should you fear me.'
With those words he threw the metal bar out of the window into the street below.
'Get him!' Thenardier shouted. 'He's defenceless.'
Two men grabbed him by the shoulders.
'Now cut his throat!' Thenardier called.
Marius stared, frozen with fear as Thenardier, knife in hand, stood hesitating a few steps away from the prisoner. The brave man was in terrible danger, but Marius still could not fire the gun. Then, in the moonlight, he saw the solution to his problem. On top of the cupboard, by his feet, he noticed the piece of paper that the elder daughter had written on: Be careful! The police are coming!
He immediately saw what he had to do. He took a piece of brick from the wall, wrapped the piece of paper around it and threw it through the hole into the middle of Thenardier's room.
He was just in time. Thenardier was advancing towards his prisoner, knife in hand, when his wife cried, 'Something fell!'
She picked up the piece of paper and handed it to her husband, who read it quickly.
'It's Eponine's handwriting!' he cried a moment later. 'Quick! Get the ladder. The police are coming and we've got to go!'
They threw the rope ladder from the open window but, before they could escape, the door opened and Inspector Javert walked in.
'Relax,' he smiled. 'You can't escape through the window. There are five of you, and fifteen of us. You have no chance. Why not come quietly?'
The men put down their weapons and surrendered without a fight. When everybody had been arrested and taken from the room, Javert noticed the prisoner, who was standing, head bowed, by the window. He turned to speak to another policeman but, when he looked back, he saw that the prisoner had gone. Javert rushed to the open window and looked down. The rope ladder was swinging gently above the empty street.
'He must have been the cleverest of them all, 'Javert murmured angrily to himself.
Chapter eight
Marius and Cosette
Not wishing to give evidence against Thenardier in court, Marius made immediate arrangements to leave his room. Early the following morning, he paid the concierge his final rent and went to live with his friend, Enjolras. Inspector Javert looked for Marius everywhere, but without success.
Two months later, Marius was deeply unhappy. He sent money every Monday to Thenardier, who was in prison, which meant that he had even less money for himself. But the main reason for his unhappiness was that he was forced to live his life with no hope of seeing 'Ursula'.
One afternoon he was sitting in a field, looking down at a small river, when his dreams of 'Ursula' were suddenly broken by the sound of a familiar voice. He looked up and recognized Eponine, Thenardiers elder daughter. Still wearing the same rags, with the same bold look in her eyes and the same rough voice, she had somehow become more beautiful. She stared at Marius with a look of pleasure on her pale face, and for some moments seemed unable to speak.
'So at last I've found you,' she finally said. 'I've been looking for you everywhere. You aren't living in the same room any more?'
'No,' said Marius.
'Well, I can understand that. It's not nice, that sort of thing. But why are you wearing that dirty old hat? 'When Marius gave no answer, she went on, 'And you've got a hole in your shirt. I'll mend it for you. A young man like you ought to be nicely dressed.'
Marius still said nothing, and after a moments pause she said, 'You don't seem very glad to see me, but I could make you look happy if I wanted to!'
'How?' said Marius. 'What do you mean?'
'You weren't so unfriendly last time.'
'I'm sorry, but what do you mean?'
She bit her lip and hesitated, as if trying to make up her mind about something. Finally, she said, 'I've got the address.'
Marius's heart seemed to miss a beat. 'You mean
'The address you wanted me to find out. The young lady, you know...' Her voice sank into a sigh.
Marius jumped up and took her by the hand.
'Let's go at once!' he cried, wild with excitement. Then he suddenly frowned and seized Eponine by the arm. 'But you must promise me,' he said, 'that you'll never tell your father the address.'
'I promise,' the girl replied, staring at Marius with amusement.
They had only gone a few steps when Eponine stopped and said, 'You remember you promised me something?'
Marius felt in his pocket. All he had in the world was the five-franc piece he intended to give her father in prison. He pushed it into her hand, but she opened her fingers and let the coin fall to the ground. She looked at him with a mixture of disappointment and sadness in her eyes.
'I don't want your money,' she said.
That evening, Cosette was alone in the house which Jean Valjean had bought about a year earlier. It was a small house in a back street, with a large, wild garden. Valjean had gone away on business for a couple of days, and Cosette was in the downstairs sitting room, playing the piano.
Suddenly, she thought she heard the sound of footsteps in the garden. She listened at the window for a minute, then ran up to her bedroom, opened the window and looked out. The moonlit garden and the street beyond it were completely empty. Cosette, not a nervous girl by nature, smiled to herself and thought no more about it.
The next evening, as she was walking in the garden, she was sure that she heard someone moving in the trees. Again, when she looked round, she saw nothing. When Jean Valjean returned from his business the following day, Cosette told him about the noises in the garden. He told her not to worry, but she noticed an anxious look in his eyes. He spent the next two nights walking around the garden, checking the gate, listening for noises, but nothing unusual happened.
Then one morning, a few days later, Cosette noticed a large stone lying on the garden bench. Nervously, she picked it up and discovered an envelope underneath it. Inside, there was a small notebook filled with love poems. Cosette sat down and began to read, enjoying the music of the language and the beauty of the handwriting. She had never read anything like this before, and it affected her deeply.
Her heart on fire, she took the notebook upstairs to her bedroom and read every word again. She remembered the handsome young man she had seen so often in the Luxembourg Gardens. As she read the notebook, she knew in her heart that he was the author of these beautiful, romantic words. Finally, she kissed the book, held it to her heart and waited for the evening, when she knew that something special was going to occur.
That evening, Jean Valjean went out. Cosette spent a long time in front of the mirror, making her hair look beautiful and deciding which dress to wear. Finally, she went out into the garden. She sat on the bench where she had found the notebook and, moments later, had the strange feeling that she was being watched. She looked round and jumped to her feet.
It was He!
He looked paler and thinner than she remembered. His dark clothes were almost invisible in the shadows, and his face shone softly in the fading light. Cosette felt suddenly faint, but she did not move or make a sound.
'Forgive me for being here.' Marius spoke at last. 'But I've been so unhappy. Do you recognize me? You mustn't be afraid. It's a long time ago, but do you remember the day when you first looked at me - in the Luxembourg Gardens? And the day you walked past me? Those things happened nearly a year ago. Forgive me for talking like this, I don't know what I'm saying - perhaps I'm annoying you? But the truth is, I can't live without you.'
'Mother!' Cosette murmured, and began to fall.
Marius caught her and held her tightly in his arms without realizing what he was doing, lost in a mist of love. Cosette, feeling her body close to his, took his hand and pressed it against her heart. Aware of the shape of the notebook under her dress, he said, 'So, you've read my notebook. Do you love me, too?'
'Of course,' she answered in a low voice. 'You know I do.'
Then, as if by magic, her lips were next to his and they were kissing. Afterwards, they sat together on the garden bench in a state of shock, neither of them speaking. Beneath the stars, they were happy just to look into each others eyes and hold each other's hands. Then, at last, they began to speak. They talked all evening about their dreams, their mistakes, their moments of happiness, their moments of despair. When everything had been said, she laid her head on his shoulder and asked, 'What's your name?'
'My name's Marius. And yours?'
'Cosette.'
During that month of May in the year 1832, Cosette and Marius met every day in the wild garden of that small, secret house. They would sit and hold hands and talk, or just gaze into each other's eyes and smile.
'How lovely you are,' Marius would sigh. 'There are moments when I think this is a dream. There are other moments when I think I'm a little mad. I love you so much.'
To which Cosette would reply, 'I love you more with every minute that passes.'
In this way, bathed in happiness, they lived untroubled by the world.
One beautiful, starry evening, Marius found Cosette sitting unhappily in her garden.
'What's the matter?' he asked, sitting next to her on the bench.
'My father said that we may have to leave,' she replied.
Marius trembled. For six weeks, he had known nothing but uncomplicated happiness. Now, for the first time, there was a cloud in the clear blue sky of his life. He could not speak, and Cosette felt his hand grow cold.
She asked, as he had done, 'What's the matter?'
He replied, in a voice so low that she could hardly hear it, 'I don't understand what you mean.'
'Father told me this morning that I have to pack everything and be ready to leave for England within a week.'
Marius rose to his feet and said coldly, 'Cosette, are you going?'
She looked up at him, her pale face lined with misery.
'What else can I do?' she cried.
'So you're leaving me.'
'Oh, Marius, why are you being so cruel to me?'
Marius turned his back to her and said, 'Then I shall have to go away.'
'No, Marius, wait. I've got an idea.'
Marius turned and was surprised to see her smiling.
'What is it?'
'If we go, you must come too. I'll tell you where, and you must meet me there, wherever it is.'
'How can I possibly do that?' he cried. 'Are you crazy? You need money to go to England, and I haven't got any. I haven't told you, Cosette, but I'm a poor man. I wear a cheap hat, my jacket has lost half its buttons and there are holes in my boots.' He turned away from her and stood with his face pressed to the trunk of a tree, almost ready to faint. He stayed in that position for some time. Finally, he heard a small sound behind him and, turning round, he saw that Cosette was in tears.
He fell on his knees in front of her and pressed her hand to his lips.
'Don't cry,' he said. 'I cannot let you leave me. I promise you that if you leave me, I shall die. But listen to me - I have a plan. Don't expect me here tomorrow.'
'Why not?' Cosette said, drying her tears. 'A whole day without seeing you! That's unbearable!'
'It's worth losing a day together if we want to be happy for the rest of our lives.'
'But what are you going to do?'
'Wait until the day after tomorrow. I'll tell you then. But until then, I must give you my address. I'm living with a friend of mine, Enjolras.' Marius then took a knife out of his pocket and scratched his address on the wall - 16, rue de la Verrerie.'
'Please, Marius,' Cosette said as she watched him. 'Where are you going tomorrow evening? I won't be able to sleep if you don't tell me.'
'I'm going to try something.'
'Well, I'll pray for you to succeed and I'll never stop thinking about you. I'll ask no more questions, but you must promise to be here early the day after tomorrow. Not later than nine o'clock.'
'I promise,' Marius said.
Chapter nine
Monsieur Gillenormand
M. Gillenormand, Marius's grandfather, was now ninety years old. He was unhappy about many things - about losing his teeth, about the political situation but, most of all, about the fact that he had not seen his grandson for four years, since their big quarrel. Although he was too proud to admit he was wrong, and although he was angry, M. Gillenormand hoped that Marius, whom he still loved, would return one day.
One evening in June, M. Gillenormand was sitting in front of a large fire, staring into the flames and thinking bitterly of Marius. He was feeling depressed, because he realized that he would probably never see his grandson again. While he was gazing into the fire, thinking these sad thoughts, his old servant entered the room and asked, 'Will Monsieur receive M. Marius?'
For a moment all the blood seemed to leave M. Gillenormand's face, and the servant began to worry that his master was ill. But the old man finally raised his head and said, in a low voice, 'Show him in.'
Marius stood uncertainly in the doorway. The poor condition of his clothes could not be seen in the half-darkness of the room. Nothing of him was clearly visible except his face, which was calm and serious, but strangely sad.
M. Gillenormand stared at his grandson with disbelief. At last! After four years! Was it really him? He wanted to open his arms and hug him, but all he said was, 'What have you come for?'
Marius murmured something in embarrassment.
'I can't hear you,' the old man said, looking annoyed. 'Have you come to apologize? Do you now see that you were wrong?'
'No, Monsieur.' Marius lowered his eyes.
'Well then,' the old man shouted, 'what do you want?'
'Monsieur, I ask you to have pity on me. I know I'm not welcome here, but I have come to ask for only one thing. Then I'll go away at once.'
'You're a young fool,' the old man said. 'Who said you had to go away? You left me - your grandfather! - to join in those street protests against the government, I suppose. You're probably in trouble with the police, or you're in debt, and you've run back to me for help
'Monsieur, it's none of those things.'
'Well, what is it exactly that you want?'
'I have come to ask your permission to get married.'
The old man paused for a moment before saying, 'So, you want to get married at the age of twenty-one. I suppose you've got some sort of career, now? Perhaps you've made a fortune. What do you earn as a lawyer?'
'Nothing.'
'Well then, I imagine the lucky girl must have money.'
'She's no richer than I am.'
'What does her father do?'
'I don't know.'
M. Gillenormand turned away with disgust.
'So that's it. Twenty-one years old, no job, no money. Your wife will have to count the sous when she goes to the market, won't she?'
'I beg you, Monsieur,' Marius cried. 'I love her so much. Please allow me to marry her!'
The old man gave a high, unpleasant laugh.
'So you said to yourself, "I'll have to go and see him, that old fool. He'll be so happy to see me that he won't care who I marry. I haven't a pair of shoes, and she hasn't a shirt, but never mind. I'm going to throw away my youth, my career, my whole life, and dive into poverty with a woman around my neck... " That's what you think, isn't it? Well, my boy, you can do whatever you want. But I will never give you my permission! Never!'
'Grandfather
'Never!'
The tone of his grandfather's voice robbed Marius of all hope. He rose and crossed the room slowly, with his head bowed. He had just reached the door, however, when M. Gillenormand moved quickly towards him, pulled him back into the room and pushed him into an armchair.
'Tell me about it,' he said to Marius, who stared back with silent amazement, unaware that the word 'grandfather' was responsible for the change in the old man's behaviour. 'Come on, tell me about your love affairs. Don't be afraid to talk. Don't forget, I'm your grandfather. Here... ' he said, taking a purse from a drawer and putting it on the table. 'Here's some money for you. Buy yourself some new clothes.'
Marius told his grandfather all about Cosette and how much he loved her. M. Gillenormand listened carefully and, when Marius had finished, he laughed.
'You must enjoy yourself when you're young,' he said. 'But you must also be sensible. Don't get married yet, that's my advice. Have fun with the girl, but don't marry her. Make her your lover but not your wife.'
Marius, too shocked to reply, shook his head and rose to his feet. He then turned slowly to the old man, bowed deeply and said, 'Four years ago you insulted my father. Today you have insulted my future wife. I shall ask no more favours of you, Monsieur. Goodbye.'
M. Gillenormand called for Marius to come back, but it was too late. The proud young man had closed the door and gone.
'Oh my God,' the old man cried, burying his face in his hands. 'What have I done? This time he'll never come back.'
Marius left his grandfathers house in a state of despair, and returning to his room, fell asleep fully-dressed on the bed. When he woke up, Enjolras was in the room with a few other friends. They all looked very nervous and excited about something.
'What's the matter?' Marius asked sleepily
'Are you coming to the funeral of General Lamarque?'
'Who's he?'
Enjolras and his friends shook their heads with amazement at their friend's lack of awareness, and soon left the room. Marius opened a drawer and took out the two guns which Inspector Javert had lent him in February. Putting them in his jacket pocket, he went out and continued to wander aimlessly around the streets, noticing only occasionally the strange atmosphere of excitement that was growing in the town. People were running around, and there was a lot of noise, but Marius paid little attention. He could think of only one thing: his meeting later that evening with Cosette. This would be his last brief happiness; after that, there would be only darkness.
At nine o'clock that evening, Marius crept into the garden of Cosette's house, but she was not there waiting for him as she had promised. Looking up, he saw that there were no lights on in the house and that all the windows were closed. Unable to control himself, he beat his fists against the walls of the house.
'Cosette!' he cried, not caring who heard him. 'Where are you?'
He called her name again and again until, exhausted, he sat down on the stone steps. Now she was gone, he told himself, he had no future. There was nothing for him to do except die.
Suddenly he heard a voice calling through the trees from the street.
'M. Marius!'
He looked up.
'Who's that?'
'Is that you, M. Marius?'
'Yes.'
'Your friends are waiting for you at the barricade in the rue de Chanvrerie.'
Marius ran to the gate and was just in time to see the figure of Eponine, Thenardier's daughter, disappearing into the shadows at the end of the street.
Chapter ten
The Barricade
In the spring of 1832, the people of Paris were ready for revolution. Charles X, who had become king in 1824, believed that he had total power over the French people. He was a strong supporter of the Catholic church and the aristocracy, and he took away the freedoms that Napoleon had given the ordinary citizens. Although this made him very unpopular, he thought that his opponents would be too weak to prevent him from doing what he wanted. He was wrong. In 1830, there was a peaceful revolution, and he was forced to leave. The new king, Louis-Philippe, was a brave and clever man who loved his country. The ordinary people liked him at first, but he soon showed that he was more interested in power for his family than democracy for his people. He understood business, but he could not understand the problems of poor people. Neither could he understand the concept of freedom of speech, and he often sent soldiers into the streets to attack people who were making public protests.
As the summer approached, the mood of the workers and the poor became angrier and angrier. Their anger exploded into violence in June 1832, when General Lamarque died. The General had been very popular with the people of France because of his love for Napoleon. The day of his funeral was arranged for 5 June, and thousands of people saw this as a chance to make a public protest against the king and his government.
At first, the funeral went quietly. Soldiers accompanied the coffin as it was carried slowly across Paris. A large crowd followed behind, waving flags and carrying swords and heavy sticks. The crowd grew more and more excited, until finally they tried to take the coffin away from the soldiers and carry it across a bridge. Their exit was blocked by more soldiers on horseback. For a moment, nothing happened. Then there were two gunshots. The first shot killed the commander of the soldiers guarding the exit to the bridge. The second killed a deaf old woman who was trying to shut her window.
Then the fighting started.
Soldiers attacked the crowd with swords; the crowd threw stones and ran screaming across the bridge. Minutes later, the sounds of war echoed across the whole city of Paris.
As soon as the fighting started, Enjolras and several of his friends started to build a barricade outside the Corinth wine shop in the rue de la Chanvrerie, a small street surrounded by dark alleys in the market district of Paris. Enjolras had been joined by many strangers as he and his friends had run shouting along the street. There was a tall, grey-haired man whom nobody knew, but whose strong, brave face had impressed everybody. There were several street children, excited by the sound of battle, who also joined them. One of these children was Eponine, who had dressed like a boy so that no one would tell her to go home. Having run to tell Marius that his friends were waiting for him, she was helping Enjolras and his companions to build the barricade. New people arrived all the time, bringing with them gunpowder and weapons to fight the soldiers who would be arriving very soon.
Enjolras, who was the leader of the rebels, organized the building of a second barricade and the manufacture of bullets from melted silver. The tall, grey-haired man was doing useful work on the larger barricade, and Eponine (whom everyone thought was a boy) worked hard too. The barricades were finished in less than an hour and, with the sound of drums in the city growing louder, Enjolras brought a table out into the street and sat down with his friends for a drink.
Night fell, but nothing happened. While the fifty men behind the barricade waited impatiently for the arrival of sixty thousand soldiers, Enjolras approached the tall, grey-haired man.
'Who are you?' he asked.
When the man said nothing, Enjolras became suspicious.
'You're a policeman, aren't you?' he said.
The man smiled and eventually admitted that he was.
'My name's Javert,' he said.
Before he could move, Enjolras ordered four men to search him. When they found a letter in his pocket which proved that he had been sent to spy on them, they tied him to a post inside the inn,
'You'll be shot two minutes before the barricade falls,' Enjolras informed him.
Marius left the garden and, mad with grief at losing Cosette, walked towards the sound of drums and gunfire in the centre of the city. He had only one thought in his mind: he wanted to die.
Marius pushed his way through the crowds of frightened, murmuring people that filled the streets until he reached the market area. Here, he found the unlit streets suddenly filled with soldiers. Unafraid, Marius ran through the shadows, ignoring shouts for him to stop. Someone fired a gun and a bullet hit a wall just behind him, but he didn't care.
He was just approaching the rue de Chanvrerie when he heard a loud voice calling from the shadows: 'Who's there?'
'The French Revolution!' he heard a distant voice reply - the voice of his friend, Enjolras.
Marius stood behind an alley wall, hidden in the shadows. Around the corner, he could see a row of soldiers aiming their guns down the rue de Chanvrerie, waiting for the order to fire.
'Fire!' the order finally came. The street was lit with a sudden flash of light and filled with the thunder of gunfire.
Then the soldiers attacked.
Marius stood up and ran along a series of alleys that led into the rue de la Chanvrerie, behind the Corinth wine shop. When he reached the stronghold, soldiers were already climbing the barricade, shooting at the rebels. Marius saw a soldier attacking Enjolras, who had fallen backwards and was calling for help. Marius took Javert's guns from his pockets and shot the soldier dead.
Soldiers now occupied the top of the barricade, but were unable to advance any further because the defenders fought so fiercely. Marius, who had thrown away his guns and was now without a weapon, began to move towards a barrel of gunpowder he had seen near the door of the wine shop. He did not notice a soldier aiming his gun at him. Neither did he see, at the moment the soldier fired, a young boy dressed in rags jump in front of the gun and fall wounded as the bullet meant for Marius hit him in the hand.
'Put down your weapons and surrender!' a soldier called from the top of the barricade.
'Fire!' Enjolras shouted.
The soldiers and the rebels fired at each other at the same time, filling the air with thick clouds of dark smoke. When the smoke cleared, there were many dead bodies on both sides. The survivors were reloading their guns in silence, when suddenly a loud voice called, 'Get out now, or I'll blow up the barricade!'
All heads turned to stare in the direction of the voice. Marius was standing at the foot of the barricade, holding a flaming torch above a barrel of gunpowder.
'If you blow up the barricade,' a sergeant called, 'you'll blow up yourself as well!'
Marius smiled and lowered the torch towards the gunpowder. Within seconds, the soldiers had left the barricade, leaving their dead and wounded behind, and were running into the darkness at the far end of the street.
Enjolras threw his arms around Marius's neck.
'So you've come!' he cried.
Marius hugged Enjolras and many other friends he recognized.
While the soldiers waited at the far end of the street for further orders, and the rebels removed dead bodies from the barricade and took care of the wounded, Marius walked around the stronghold in a kind of dream. After two months of happiness with Cosette, he was now in the middle of a war. He could not believe this was happening to him. He was so confused that he did not recognize Javert, tied to a post inside the inn throughout the battle.
As he was walking by the smaller barricade, his thoughts were interrupted by a weak voice calling his name from the shadows.
'M. Marius!'
He looked about him but, seeing no one, he started to walk away, thinking that he was imagining things.
'M. Marius!' He heard the voice again.
Marius gazed into the shadows, but could still see nothing.
'I'm at your feet,' the voice said.
Looking down, Marius saw a dark shape crawling along the ground towards him. By the light of a lamp on the pavement, he could see a torn jacket, trousers with holes in them, and two bare feet. A white face was turned towards him and the voice asked, 'Do you recognize me? It's Eponine.'
Marius bent down quickly, and saw that it was indeed that unhappy girl, dressed in a man's clothes.
'What are you doing here?' he said. Then, noticing the pool of blood on the ground behind her, cried, 'You're wounded! I'll carry you to the inn. They'll take care of you there. Is it very bad?'
She showed him the bullet hole in her hand.
'A soldier was going to shoot you,' she said, her voice no more than a whisper. 'But I put my hand in front of his gun.'
'You poor child,' Marius said. 'We'll put a bandage on that wound immediately. You'll be all right.'
'The bullet passed through my hand,' Eponine murmured, 'but it came out through my back. It's no use trying to move me, but I'll tell you how you can treat my wound better than any doctor. Sit down on that stone, close beside me.'
Marius sat next to her. She rested her head on his knee and said without looking at him, 'Oh, what happiness. Now I don't feel any pain,'
For a moment she was silent. She pressed her hand to her chest, from which blood was pouring like dark wine. Then, with a great effort, she raised herself on one arm and, struggling for breath, looked into Marius's eyes.
'I can't cheat you,' she said at last. 'I have a letter for you in my pocket. I've had it since yesterday. I was asked to post it, but I didn't. I didn't want you to get it. But now we're both going to die, it doesn't matter, does it? I can't be jealous any more. Take your letter.'
She took hold of Marius's hand with her wounded hand and, without seeming to feel the pain, guided it to her pocket, from which he took the letter.
'Now you must promise me something for my trouble,' she said. 'You must kiss me on the forehead after I'm dead... I shall know.'
She let her head fall back on his knees. Her eyelids trembled, and then she was still. Just as Marius thought that her sad soul had finally left her body, she slowly opened her eyes, and said in a voice so sweet that it seemed already to come from another world, 'You know, M. Marius, I think I was a little bit in love with you.'
With those words, she closed her eyes for the last time and died.
Marius kissed her pale forehead and laid her gently on the ground. Then he returned to the wine shop, and opened the letter that she had given him. By candlelight he read,
My dearest, We are leaving this house at once. We go tonight to Number 7, rue de l'Homme-Arme, and in a week we shall be in England. Cosette, 4 June.
Marius covered Cosette's letter with kisses. So she still loved him! He thought for a moment that now he must not die, but then he thought, 'She's going away.'
She was going with her father to England, and his grandfather had refused to give his permission for him to marry. Nothing had changed, and he decided that he had one last duty to perform: he must send Cosette a final message and tell her of his death. He tore a page out of the pocket notebook he always carried and wrote:
Our marriage was impossible. I went to my grandfather, and he refused to give his permission. I have no money, and neither have you. I hurried to see you, but you had gone. You remember the promise I made you. I shall keep it. I shall die. I love you. When you read this, my soul will be very near and smiling at you.
He folded the letter, wrote Cosette's new address on the back and called over a young boy.
'What's your name?' he asked the boy.
'Gavroche.'
'Well, Gavroche, will you do something for me? I want you to deliver this letter to the address written on the outside.'
The boy scratched his head, thought for a moment, and then, with a sudden movement, took the letter and ran off into the night.
Chapter eleven
The Letter
Jean Valjean, at that moment, was in a state of terrible shock. For the first time in their life together, he and Cosette had quarrelled. She had not wanted to leave the house, but she had eventually obeyed him. They had left quickly, at nightfall, bringing their servant, Toussaint, with them, but very little luggage. Cosette had brought her letter case and blotter with her, Valjean his box of child's clothing and the old National Guard uniform which all respectable men possessed, and which he had worn under a previous identity.
In their new house, they went to bed in silence. Cosette, however, did not leave her bedroom the next day, and Jean Valjean had dinner alone. As he was eating, Toussaint told him about the fighting in the city, but he did not pay much attention. He was too worried about Cosette. There was no reason, he thought, why they should not continue to live happily together in England. As long as he had Cosette, he would be happy, and it did not matter where they lived. He began to feel happier as he thought about the journey they would soon be making. He stood up and was going to leave the room when something made him stop. He glanced again at the mirror. Cosette's blotter was lying on a cupboard just below it and, as Valjean stared at its reflection, he read the following lines:
My dearest, We are leaving this house at once. We go tonight to Number 7, rue de 1'Homme-Arme, and in a week we shall be in England. Cosette, 4June.
In her unhappy state of mind, Cosette had forgotten to remove the page that she had used to blot the letter she had written to Marius. She had left it on the cupboard and the mirror, reflecting the backwards handwriting, made the message clearly visible.
Valjean moved closer to the mirror and read the lines again, not wanting to believe them. But there was no doubt that this was Cosette's handwriting. He began to shake and he fell back into an armchair, feeling angry and betrayed. He had suffered terribly over the years and, until now, he had survived every disaster. But this was the worst thing that had ever happened to him - someone was threatening to rob him of the only person he loved!
He murmured to himself, 'She's going to leave me,' and the pain of those words cut into his heart like a knife.
After a short time, he rose to his feet and looked again at the blotter. His anger and misery of minutes before had been replaced by a terrible calmness. He stared at the blotter, coldness in his eyes, the darkness of the deepest night in his heart. He remembered clearly the young man in the Luxembourg Gardens who had shown such great interest in Cosette, and he was certain that this was the man she had written to.
He went out into the night and sat on the doorstep, his heart filled with a terrible hatred for the man who was trying to steal Cosette from him. He sat for a long time listening to the sound of distant gunfire in the city, wondering how to get his revenge, when suddenly he heard footsteps. Looking up, he saw a pale-faced boy, dressed in rags, studying the numbers of the houses in the street.
Seeing Valjean on his doorstep, the boy stopped and asked, 'Do you live in this street?'
'Yes. Why?'
'I'm looking for Number Seven. I have a letter for a girl who lives here.'
'Well, I'm the girl's father. You can give the letter to me. Oh, and one more thing before you go,'Valjean said when the boy had handed him the letter. 'Where should I take the reply?'
'That letter comes from the barricade in the rue de la Chanvrerie,' the boy replied. 'Which is where I'm going now. Goodnight citizen.'
Jean Valjean went back into the house and tried to make sense of the words that danced before his eyes: I shall die... When you read this, my soul will be very near...
This was enough to fill his hate-filled heart with sudden joy. So, the problem was solved! The man who threatened his happiness was going to die - was perhaps already dead.
Then Valjean frowned and, after a quick calculation, decided that Marius was probably still alive. But it made no difference. He was still certain to die, and Valjean's happiness would be safe. If he kept the letter in his pocket, Cosette would never know what had happened to the other man, and life with her would continue the same as before. What happiness!
But his happiness had no sooner returned than it disappeared again in a cloud of despair. In his heart he knew he had no choice. For the sake of Cosette's happiness, he would have to try and save the life of the man she loved - the man he hated more than any other in the world.
Half an hour later he left the house, dressed in his National Guard uniform, with a loaded gun and a pocket full of gunpowder, and made his way towards the market district of Paris.
Chapter twelve
Fight to the Death
During the night, the thirty-seven remaining rebels strengthened the main barricade and made more bullets. The ground floor of the wine shop became a hospital for the wounded, and the bodies of the dead were taken to an alley near the smaller of the two barricades. Four of the dead people were National Guards, and their uniforms were removed.
After a long discussion with his friends, Enjolras decided that the married men (there were five of them) had to leave.
'It's your duty not to die,' he told them. 'You must return to your families.'
'How can we leave?' they protested. 'We're surrounded. The soldiers will shoot us as soon as they see us.'
'You can wear these.' Enjolras pointed to the National Guard uniforms that had been taken off the dead soldiers.
'But there are only four,' Marius observed.
'Then one of us must stay and fight,' one of the married men replied.
A long argument followed, during which each of the married men tried to persuade the others to go. Finally, someone shouted to Marius, 'You decide which one must stay.'
Marius went pale at the thought of having to choose which man had to die. He stared down at the four uniforms but, as he did so, a fifth uniform fell as if by magic at his feet.
Looking round, Marius recognized Cosette's father. Jean Valjean, who had arrived unnoticed at the barricade, had been listening to the argument and had quickly understood the situation.
'Now you can all leave,' he said.
The sky grew lighter, but not a door or window was open in the street. The barricade was stronger than it had been for the first assault, and the rebels were at their positions, guns loaded and ready for action. They did not have long to wait.
Sounds of chains and of heavy wheels moving along the stone streets could be heard, and then soldiers came into view at the end of the street, pulling a large cannon. The rebels fired their guns but, when the smoke had cleared, they saw the soldiers, unharmed, steadily aiming the cannon at the barricade. Moments later, an officer shouted a command and the cannon roared into action. The cannonball crashed into the bottom of the barricade with a loud explosion, but did little damage. The rebels clapped and cheered.
More soldiers moved into position at the end of the street, behind the cannon, and started to build a low wall with pieces of broken stone. At the same time, the leader of the gun crew adjusted the aim of the cannon.
'Heads down!' Enjolras shouted.
The next cannonball exploded against the wall at one end of the barricade, killing two men and wounding three.
'We mustn't let that happen again,' Enjolras said. He aimed his gun over the barricade at the leader of the gun crew, and fired. The gunner - a fair-haired, handsome young man - spun round twice with his head thrown back, and fell sideways across the cannon. Blood poured from the middle of his back.
A tear rolled down Enjolras's cheek.
'It's sad,' he murmured to Marius, who was standing next to him. 'He looked a brave young man.'
The battle continued for some time; the cannon destroyed the upper windows of the wine shop, and did some damage to the barricade, but the rebels did not withdraw. They fired back at the soldiers, killing many men. In the pauses between shooting, the rebels could hear the sound of fighting in other parts of Paris. They were filled with hope that help would come soon, but the hope did not last long. Within half an hour the sound of gunfire in other places had stopped, and the rebels knew that they were alone. When a second cannon was moved into position next to the first, they knew that the end was near.
Both cannons fired together, accompanied by gunfire from soldiers at the end of the street and on the rooftops. As other guns began firing at the smaller barricade, the rebels fought back bravely, but they were running out of bullets. There were only twenty-six men left, and the main attack on the barricade was going to take place very soon. Some men, including Marius, stayed on the main barricade, while the others built a low stone wall around the door of the wine shop. Enjolras, inside the wine shop, turned to Javert, who was still tied to the post.
'I haven't forgotten you,' he said, putting a loaded gun on the table. 'The last man to leave this place will blow your brains out.'
At this point, Jean Valjean spoke to Enjolras.
'You're the leader, aren't you? Can I ask you for a favour?'
'You saved a man's life by giving him your uniform. You deserve some reward. What do you want?'
'Let me kill this man.'
'That's fair,' Enjolras decided, when nobody objected. 'You can have your spy.'
At the same moment there was the sound of a drum, followed by a loud roar.
'They're coming!' cried Marius from the top of the barricade.
The rebels rushed to their positions, leaving Valjean alone with Javert inside the wine shop. Valjean untied the rope around Javert's feet and, taking him by the belt of his coat, led him outside. Only Marius, looking over his shoulder, saw them cross the stronghold towards the smaller barricade. Valjean, his gun in one hand, pulled Javert behind him over the barricade and into a narrow alley, where the corner of a house hid them from view. A terrible heap of dead bodies lay not far away, among them the blood-stained body of a young girl in man's clothes - Eponine.
Javert glanced at the dead body and murmured, 'I think I know that girl. 'Then, returning his attention to Valjean, he said calmly, 'I think you know me, too. Take your revenge.'
Valjean, however, took a knife from his pocket and cut the ropes that tied Javert's wrists.
'You're free to go,' he said.
When Javert stared at him, speechless with surprise, Valjean went on, I don't suppose I'll leave here alive. But if I do, I'm staying at Number 7, rue de l'Homme-Arme. Now go.'
Javert buttoned his coat, straightened his shoulders and, with a puzzled look on his face, began to walk off in the direction of the market. He had only gone a few steps, however, when he turned and looked at Valjean. 'I find this embarrassing,' he said. 'I'd rather you killed me.'
'Go away,' Valjean replied.
Javert walked away slowly and Valjean, waiting for him to turn a corner, fired his gun into the air and returned to the stronghold.
'It's done,' he said.
There was a roar of gunfire and the soldiers attacked, rushing towards the barricade. Many fell, but many more reached the barricade. The first assault was beaten back by the brave rebels, but the soldiers attacked again and again. Soon, the ground below the barricade was piled with dead and wounded men as the rebels and soldiers fought hand to hand. The rebels fought long and hard to defend the stronghold, but finally they had to withdraw to the low wall outside the wine shop. They stood with their backs to the door, shooting up at the soldiers who were climbing down towards them from the barricade. One by one the remaining rebels escaped into the wine shop, until only Enjolras and Marius were left outside. As the two friends moved back towards the door, fighting off the soldiers, a bullet hit Marius in the shoulder. His eyes closed and, in great pain, he felt a hand grab him as he fell.
'They've taken me prisoner,' he thought, moments before losing consciousness. 'Now I shall be shot.'
The soldiers, meanwhile, attacked the wine shop. Before long, they broke down the door and rushed inside. Enjolras and the few surviving rebels fought bravely, but the soldiers were too strong. Soon, all the rebels were dead, including Enjolras, who was the last to die. Sword in hand, surrounded by soldiers, he refused to surrender. He died in a rain of bullets with a strangely victorious smile on his lips.
Chapter thirteen
The Sewers of Paris
Marius had indeed been taken prisoner, but not by the soldiers. It was Jean Valjean's hand that had caught him as he fell. Valjean had taken no part in the battle. He had been looking after wounded men while bullets flew all around him. When Marius had been hit, Valjean ran to him at once, grabbed him before he fell and carried his unconscious body into a small alley behind the wine shop. Valjean lowered Marius to the ground, stood with his back to the wall and looked around him.
The situation was terrible. There seemed to be no escape. On one side of him was the field of battle. On the other side was the low barricade, behind which hundreds of soldiers waited for rebels trying to escape. Both ways meant certain death. It was a situation that only a bird could have escaped from. Valjean looked desperately around him, at the house opposite, the barricade, the ground. And then he had a sudden idea!
At the foot of the smaller barricade, half-hidden by broken stones and pieces of wood, there was a hole in the road covered with an iron grille. Valjean leapt forward and, using all his strength, he moved the stones and wood, opened the grille, lifted Marius on to his shoulders and climbed down into the darkness.
A few minutes later, he found himself in a long underground passage, a place of absolute peace and silence. He was inside the Paris sewers. He could just see, by the grey light from the grille above his head, that he was surrounded by walls. Ahead of him lay total darkness, but he had to go on. The soldiers might discover the grille by the barricade at any moment, and come down in search of him.
With Marius lying across his shoulders, Valjean walked forward into the darkness, feeling his way along the wet, slippery walls with his hands. He moved from one passage into another, slipping several times on the wet floor. He could not see where he was going, but he knew he had to follow the downward slope of the passages towards the river.
He walked blindly downwards in this way for a long time, his clothes wet with the blood from Marius's wound, the faint whisper of the young man's breath in his ear. He walked in total darkness, the silence broken occasionally by the thunder of gun carriages and horses racing along the streets of Paris far above his head.
Suddenly, he saw his own shadow on the floor of the passage in front of him. Looking back, he saw the distant light of a torch. He was being followed! He pressed himself against the wall, held his breath and waited. In the distance, a group of men formed a circle around the torchlight. They seemed to be listening for something, waiting for someone to move. Finally, the group of men moved off along another passage, and Valjean was left in total darkness once again.
He continued his journey through the sewers. Sometimes the roof of the passages was so low that he had to bend down as he walked. His feet slipped all the time in the water on the ground, and he felt sick and faint with the terrible, airless smell. At last, exhausted, he stopped beneath a large grille that brought him much-needed light and fresh air. He laid Marius down gently at the edge of the sewer, and looked down at his face. It was covered with blood and as pale as death. Valjean tore pieces oft his own shirt and bandaged Marius's wounded shoulder as well as he could. Then, bending over the unconscious body, Valjean stared at Marius with hatred in his eyes.
He found two objects in Marius's clothing: a piece of bread and a wallet. Valjean ate the bread and, opening the wallet, found a note which Marius had written:
My name is Marius Pontmercy. My body must be taken to the house of my grandfather, M. Gillenormand, 6 rue des Filles-du- Calvaire, in the Marais.
Valjean repeated the address until he could remember it, returned the wallet to Marius's pocket, picked Marius up again and continued his journey downwards towards the river. He did not know what part of the city he was passing under or how far he had come. The only thing he was sure of was that the light through the grilles far above his head was growing weaker, which meant that the sun was setting. At one point he had to walk waist-deep through water, and almost sank as the ground turned to sand beneath his feet. Finally, when even his great strength was beginning to fade, he saw ahead of him a light - the clear light of day. He was suddenly filled with new energy at the sight, at last, of his way of escape from the sewers. Forgetting the weight of Marius on his shoulders and his own hunger and tiredness, he ran towards the light. He had to bend as the roof of the tunnel became lower, but when he reached the light, Valjean stopped and gave a cry of despair. The opening was closed with a strong iron gate, held firm by a huge, rusty lock. Through the bars, Valjean could see daylight, the river, a narrow riverbank - but how could he get out?
Valjean laid Marius down by the wall, where the floor was dry. Then, moving to the gate, he shook it fiercely with both hands, trying to bend the bars with the last of his strength. But the gate was solid and the bars were firm.
Valjean turned his back to the gate and sank to the ground, his head bowed between his knees. There was no way out and, as all hope of escape left him, he began to think of Cosette.
While in this state of despair, Valjean felt a hand on his shoulder. He thought he was dreaming. He looked up and saw a man dressed in old clothes standing beside him. Despite the unexpectedness of this meeting, Valjean recognized the man at once. It was Thenardier. Valjean did not show that he recognized the man, and saw with relief that Thenardier had not recognized him.
'I'll make a bargain with you,' the man said.
'What do you mean?'
Thenardier nodded in Marius's direction.
'You've killed a man. Give me half of what you found in this man's pockets, and I'll unlock the gate for you.' He produced a large key from his pocket, and a piece of rope. 'I'll give you this as well,' he said. 'Then you can tie stones to the body and throw it in the river.'
Valjean took the rope without speaking.
'What about my share of the money?'Thenardier asked.
Valjean took thirty francs from his pockets and showed it to Thenardier, who stared with disbelief. 'You killed a man for just thirty francs? You're a fool.' He searched Marius's pockets himself, and then Valjean's.
'It's true,' he said at last. 'That's all there is. Oh well. Never say that I'm not a kind man.'
He took the thirty francs and, helping Valjean to lift Marius on to his shoulders, he put the key in the lock and opened the gate just wide enough for Valjean to pass through. When Valjean was outside, Thenardier closed the gate behind him and disappeared, like a rat, into the darkness of the sewers.
Valjean laid Marius gently on the grass and stood up, surrounded by silence, enjoying the feeling of fresh air on his face. Then, just as he was bending to splash water from the river on Marius's face, he was aware of someone else standing behind him. He looked round quickly and saw a tall man in a long coat, a large stick in his hand. Although the man's face was hidden in shadow, Valjean recognized him as Inspector Javert.
Javert, however, did not recognize Valjean at first. He had been more interested in catching Thenardier, who had escaped from prison and was known to be in the area.
'Who are you?' he asked.
Valjean told him his name and stood, without moving, as Javert approached and stared into his eyes.
'Inspector Javert,' Valjean said quietly. 'I beg you to do me one favour. I promise not to try and escape. I gave you my address this morning, if you remember, so you would know where to find me anyway.'
Javert did not seem to hear. He stared into Valjean's eyes for a long time, then, stepping back with a look of confusion in his eyes, asked dreamily, 'What are you doing here? Who is this man?'
'Will you help me to take him home?' Valjean said. 'He's badly injured.'
Javert looked unhappy, but he did not refuse. Bending down, he took a handkerchief from his pocket, wet it in the river and bathed Marius's blood-stained forehead. Then he felt Marius's wrist.
'He's dead,' he said.
'No, not yet,' Valjean replied, feeling in Marius's jacket for the wallet. 'Look,' he said, showing Javert the note with Marius's grandfather's address. 'That's where we need to take him.'
Javert shouted to the driver who was waiting for him to bring his carriage close to the river. With Marius in the back seat, Valjean and Javert side by side in the front, the carriage drove off quickly through the dark and strangely empty streets of Paris.
When they arrived at M. Gillenormand's house, a servant answered the door.
'Does M. Gillenormand live here?' Javert asked.
'Yes. What do you want?'
'We're bringing back his grandson. He's dead. Go and wake his grandfather. We're bringing him in.'
Javert, Valjean and the driver carried Marius into the house and laid him gently on a sofa in M. Gillenormand's sitting-room. While one servant ran to find a doctor and another looked for clean sheets, Valjean felt Javert's hand on his arm. He understood, and went downstairs with Javert close behind him. When they had got back into the carriage, however, Valjean said, 'Inspector, will you do one last thing for me before you arrest me?'
'What is it? 'Javert replied impatiently.
'Let me go home for a minute. After that, you can do whatever you want with me.'
Javert was silent for some moments, his chin sunk in the collar of his overcoat. Then he pulled down the window in front of him.
'Number 7, rue de l'Homme-Arme,' he told the driver.
Neither man spoke during the journey. At the end of the rue de l'Homme-Arme, which was too narrow for the carriage to enter, Javert paid the driver and accompanied Valjean to his front door on foot.
'Go in,' said Javert, with a strange, distant look in his eyes. 'I'll wait for you here.'
Valjean went into his house and called, 'It's me!' Climbing the stairs, he paused for a moment to look out of the window to see what Javert was doing. But the street was empty; there was no one there.
The next morning, Inspector Javert's body was discovered floating in the river. The poor man, unable to understand the kindness and gentle nature of the man he had spent his whole life hating, had taken his own life by jumping from a bridge. It was the only way he knew to escape the confusion that was poisoning his heart.
When M. Gillenormand saw his pale, lifeless-looking grandson lying on the sofa, he shook from head to foot. Leaning against the door for support, he murmured, 'Marius!'
'He has just been brought here,' said a servant. 'He was on the barricade and
'He's dead!' cried the old man in a terrible voice. 'The fool! He did this to hurt me, the ungrateful boy. I try to be good to him, and this is how he rewards me!'
The old man walked to the window and, while he complained to the night about the pain and grief his grandson had caused him, the doctor arrived. After listening to Marius's heart, he organized his removal to a bed in another room, and returned to M. Gillenormand, who was still standing by the window.
'Will he live?' M. Gillenormand asked, his eyes wild with fear.
'I don't know,' the doctor replied. 'The wound to his body is not serious, but there are deep cuts on his head. It's difficult to say M. Gillenormand went to Marius's bedside.
'You heartless boy,' he said angrily. 'A fool who prefers fighting to dancing and having fun. What kind of man are you? Are you mad? But it makes no difference. I too shall die. That makes you a murderer, a cold-hearted killer. I cannot feel grief for you. At that moment, Marius's eyes slowly opened and his gaze rested upon M. Gillenormand.
'Marius!' the old man cried. 'Marius, my child, grandson! You're alive after all!'
Chapter fourteen
The Wedding
Marius lay for a long time between life and death in a state of fever, endlessly repeating the name of Cosette.
'He mustn't get excited,' the doctor warned.
Every day, according to one of the servants, a white-haired, well-dressed gentleman came to ask for news of the sick man.
Finally, after three months, the doctor announced that Marius was out of danger. But he had to spend the next two months resting because of the damage to his shoulder. M. Gillenormand grew happier as his grandson's condition improved. He did strange, unexpected things, like running up and down stairs without knowing why. He gave his neighbour, a pretty woman, a bunch of flowers, which greatly annoyed her husband.
Marius, meanwhile, tried to make sense of what had happened to him. He thought about Enjolras and Eponine, and wondered why Cosette's father had been at the barricade. He could not understand why nobody could tell him how he had been saved. All he knew was that he had been brought to his grandfather's house in a carriage. He noticed his grandfather's tenderness towards him, but he could not forget the old man's unfairness and cruelty to his father, who had died penniless and unloved. Most of all, however, he thought about Cosette, and how he could find her again.
'There's something I have to say to you,' Marius told his grandfather one day.
'What is it?'
'I want to get married.'
'But of course,' the old man laughed.
'What do you mean - of course?'
'That's understood. You will have your little girl.'
'I don't understand,' Marius said, almost speechless with amazement.
'You will have her,' the old man repeated. 'She comes here every day in the shape of an old man who asks for news of you. While you've been ill, she's spent her time crying and making bandages for you. I know all about her. She lives at Number 7, rue de l'Homme-Arme. You see, I'm not as unkind as you think. I've found out that she's a charming girl and that she loves you. I knew you were angry with me, and I thought, "What can I do to make him love me?" Then I thought, "I can give him Cosette." I wanted to invite her to see you, but the doctor warned me that you would probably get too excited. So I advise you, dear boy, to eat more meat and get better soon. Then you can marry your Cosette and be happy.'
Having said this, the old man burst into tears. He held Marius's head to his chest and they cried together.
'Grandfather,' Marius said at last, 'I'm feeling much better already. When can I see her?'
'You can see her tomorrow.'
'Why not today?'
'All right, I'll fetch her today. You've called me "grandfather"; you've shown me that you love me after all. You've earned your reward!'
Later that day, Cosette arrived at M. Gillenormand's house. Standing beside her on the doorstep was a white-haired man with a strangely nervous smile.
M. Gillenormand showed them up to the room where Marius was waiting. Cosette stood in the doorway, overcome with happiness. She wanted to throw herself into Marius's arms, but was unable to move, afraid to show the world that she loved him.
'Monsieur.' M. Gillenormand addressed Jean Valjean. 'I have the honour, on behalf of my grandson, Marius Pontmercy, to ask for your daughter's hand in marriage.'
Jean Valjean bowed.
'Good, then that is agreed,' M. Gillenormand said and, turning to Marius and Cosette, he added, 'My children, you are free to love one another.'
When they were alone together, Cosette and Marius kissed.
'Is it really you?' Cosette murmured at last. 'I can't believe it. I'm so happy to see you. I was so excited today that I haven't even dressed up for you. I must look terrible. But why don't you say something? Why are you letting me do all the talking? Do you still love me? Oh, I'm so wild with happiness
'My love...' Marius whispered.
The wedding was arranged for February the following year. Jean Valjean arranged everything. Having been a mayor, he knew how to solve an awkward problem: the question of Cosette's real family He told everybody that he was not her father, but her guardian. He also invented a dead family for Cosette, so that everybody believed she was an orphan. Valjean, as her guardian, gave Cosette a large amount of money - half a million francs - but did not tell her that the money was his. He told her that the money came from a man who preferred to remain unknown. It was arranged that the couple, who could not believe their sudden, new-found happiness, would live with M. Gillenormand after the wedding.
Cosette, accompanied by Jean Valjean, visited Marius every day. Marius did not speak much to Valjean. Despite enjoying an occasional conversation with him, he found something strange about the old man. He could not believe that this was the same man he had seen at the barricade all those months ago - it seemed like a bad dream to him.
But there were more important things for Marius to think about. Apart from preparing for his wedding, there were two people that he wanted to find. First, there was Thenardier.
He was, without doubt, a bad man, but Marius had promised his father to find him and help him. He employed agents to find Thenardier, but without success. The only thing they discovered was that Mme Thenardier had died, and that her husband had escaped from prison and disappeared with his surviving daughter, Azelma.
Second, there was the mysterious stranger who had saved his life. Marius's attempts to find him also ended in failure, and the true story of his escape from the barricade remained a complete mystery to him.
One evening, when Marius was talking to Cosette and Jean Valjean about the mystery and his unsuccessful attempts to solve it, he became angry with Cosette's guardian's lack of interest in his story.
'The man was a hero,' Marius said. 'Do you realize, Monsieur, how brave this man was? He rescued me from the field of battle and carried me through the sewers of Paris. He risked his life to save a dying man, and why? He was a total stranger. He did it without any thought of a reward. Oh, I wish Cosette's money were mine.'
'It is yours,' Valjean reminded him.
'I would give it all,' said Marius,'to find that man!'
Jean Valjean was silent.
Cosette and Marius made a handsome couple on their wedding day. All previous unhappiness was forgotten as they kissed in the church, watched proudly by M. Gillenormand and Jean Valjean. There were flowers everywhere when they returned to M. Gillenormand's house for the wedding feast. It was the happiest night of Cosette's life, spoilt only by one thing: the fact that her guardian - whom she still thought of as her father - went home before the feast had started, saying that he felt ill. But Cosette was not unhappy for long. She had Marius, and she would be happy with him for the rest of her life!
Jean Valjean, meanwhile, went home, lit his candle and went upstairs to bed. That night, however, he was unable to sleep. He remembered the little girl he had rescued from the Thenardiers ten years earlier, and felt sad that he was no longer the most important man in her life. Another man was the centre of her universe. He was proud of having helped to bring her happiness with Marius, but another thing troubled his soul: the fact that nobody, not even Cosette, knew the truth about him. That he was Jean Valjean, a criminal who had spent nineteen years in prison and who had stolen silver candlesticks from a trusting and kind-hearted bishop. He knew that if he told Cosette and Marius the truth, he would spoil everybody's happiness and he would lose their love and respect. On the other hand, if he continued to lie about his past, he would lose his own soul. What could he do?
The next day Valjean visited M. Gillenormand's house, and asked to speak to Marius in private. Marius hugged Valjean warmly, addressed him as 'father' and invited him to lunch, but Valjean shook his head and said, 'Monsieur, I have something to tell you.'
Marius listened quietly as Valjean told him everything about his life. Finally, in a state of shock and confusion, the young man said, 'Why have you told me all this? No one forced you to.'
'If I had continued to keep my secret to myself, I would have destroyed my own heart,' Valjean replied. 'Besides, I belong to no family. Cosette was the only family I ever had. Everything ended for me when she married you yesterday. She is happy with the man she loves. I tried to persuade myself that it would be better not to admit the truth about my past, but it was no use. I could not silence the voice that speaks to me when I am alone.'
Neither of them spoke for several minutes. Then Marius murmured, 'Poor Cosette. When she hears
'But you must promise not to tell her!' Valjean interrupted. 'She'll be heart-broken if she hears the truth about me. I don't think I could bear it... '
He sank into an armchair and buried his face in his hands. 'Don't worry,' Marius said at last. 'I'll keep your secret. But I think it would be better if you stopped seeing her.'
'I understand,' Valjean said, rising to leave. But at the door he half-turned and said, 'Monsieur, if you will permit me, I would like to come and see her. I wouldn't come often or stay very long. We could meet in that little room on the ground floor. Please Monsieur, if I can't see Cosette again, I'll have nothing left to live for. Besides, if I suddenly stopped visiting, people would become suspicious and begin to talk
'You can come every evening,' said Marius. 'Monsieur, you are very kind,' said Jean Valjean, shaking Marius's hand and leaving the room.
Chapter fifteen
The Truth at Last
Marius kept his promise about not telling Cosette, and Valjean visited her every evening in a small room on the ground floor. It was cold and damp, but a fire had been lit and two armchairs had been placed in front of it. At first, Cosette could not understand why Valjean refused to meet her upstairs. When he refused to kiss her cheek, she began to feel unhappy, afraid that she had done something to offend him. She pressed his hands in hers and held them to her lips.
'Please, please be kind!' she begged. 'I want you to come and live with us. You'll always be my father and I'm not going to let you go.'
He released his hands.
'You mustn't call me "father" any more,' he told her. 'You must call me "Monsieur Jean".'
'I don't understand,' she said, becoming angry. 'This is ridiculous. You're upsetting me very much, and I don't know why you're being so cruel.'
'You don't need a father any more. You have a husband.'
'What a thing to say!' Cosette replied. 'Are you angry with me because I'm happy?'
'Cosette,' he said, 'your happiness is the only thing that matters to me. You're happy now, and so my work is complete.'
With these words, he picked up his hat and left.
Jean Valjean continued his evening visits, but the relationship between himself and Cosette became cooler and more distant. She stopped calling him 'father' or asking him questions. As 'Monsieur Jean', he gradually became a different person to her, and she began not to depend on him for her happiness.
Valjean would sit looking at Cosette in silence, or would talk about incidents from their past. One evening in April, he called at the usual time but was told that Cosette had gone out with her husband. He waited in the small, damp room for an hour before sadly returning home. Over the next few days, his visits began to be interrupted by servants calling Cosette to dinner. When he arrived, he discovered that the fire had not been lit, and the armchairs had been left near the door. One evening he discovered there were no chairs in the room at all - he and Cosette had to stand in the cold for their whole meeting. Valjean realized what was happening; Marius was telling the servants not to make him welcome any more. That night he went home in despair, and the next evening he did not come at all.
When Valjean did not appear for the second evening, Cosette sent a servant to his house to ask if he was well. Valjean replied that he was very well, but that he had business to attend to. He did not return to the house again, and Cosette was too busy with married life to think too much about him. She did not realize that, every evening, Valjean would walk slowly from his house until he reached the corner of the street where she lived. He would then stare at the house for several minutes, tears rolling down his cheeks, before turning round and slowly returning home.
Marius thought it was right to exclude Valjean from Cosette's life. He achieved this without cruelty, but without weakness. Apart from the details about his life that Valjean had confessed to him, he knew that Valjean had killed Inspector Javert at the barricade. His private investigations into the old man's past had also revealed an even more disgusting fact. He had discovered that Valjean's money really belonged to somebody called Monsieur Madeleine, a wealthy manufacturer from Montreuil who had mysteriously disappeared. He persuaded Cosette, therefore, not to use any of the money her guardian had given her, and to live on the money that he had started to earn as a lawyer. Cosette had not been happy about this. She could not understand why her father, as she still thought of Valjean, had stopped visiting her. She still loved him in her heart. But she loved her husband even more, and she gradually became used to not depending on the old man for her happiness.
One evening a servant brought Marius a letter, saying, 'The writer is waiting in the hall.'
The smell of tobacco and the handwriting on the envelope was so familiar that Marius immediately thought of the Jondrettes. He read the letter quickly. It was signed 'Thenard', and was asking for money. Marius could not believe his luck. He had tried without success to find the man who had saved his father's lite at Waterloo, and now the man had come to him! He immediately asked the servant to show the man in.
However, Marius had a shock when he saw the man - he did not recognize him at all! He was an old man with a big nose, glasses and neat grey hair. He was wearing smart black clothes, and a gold watch chain hung from his jacket pocket.
'What do you want?' Marius asked coldly, as the stranger bowed to him.
The stranger explained in great detail how he used to work for the government in foreign countries and that, now he was retired, he wanted to move to South America with his wife and daughter. Unfortunately, it was a long journey, and he needed money.
'What has that to do with me?'
'Has M. Pontmercy not read my letter?'
Marius had only read the letter quickly, and could not remember the details, so he said, 'Go on.'
'I have a secret to tell you, M. Pontmercy,' the stranger said. 'I'll tell you the first part for nothing. I think you'll be interested;
'Well?'
'The man you think is your wife's guardian is a murderer and a thief. His name is Jean Valjean.'
'I know that.'
'Did you know that he spent nineteen years in prison?'
'I know that too.'
The stranger narrowed his eyes, trying to hide his disappointment and anger at Marius's calmness. Then he gave a strange smile.
'I have more information to tell you. It concerns money that belongs to your wife. It's a remarkable secret and I'll sell the information to you for 20,000 francs.'
'I know this secret already,' Marius said, 'just as I knew the others.'
'10,000 francs?'
'I repeat, you have nothing to tell me.'
'But I need to eat, Monsieur!' the visitor said, losing confidence. 'I'll tell you for twenty francs.'
'I know it already,' Marius said. 'I know everything. I even know your real name. It's Thenardier.'
The visitor laughed, but Marius went on, 'You're also Jondrette. And you once had an inn in Montfermeil.'
'I deny it!'
'You're a completely rotten man, but I'll give you this.' Marius took a banknote out of his pocket and threw it in the stranger's face.
'Thank you, M. Pontmercy!' the man said, examining the note. '500 francs! That's real money. Oh well, I suppose we can relax.'
With those words, he removed his false nose, glasses and neat grey wig.
'M. Pontmercy is absolutely right,' he said, changing his voice. 'I am Thenardier.'
He waited for a few seconds to see Marius's reaction.
Marius, meanwhile, was grateful for finally having the chance to help Thenardier, and therefore to keep the promise he had made to his father. Thenardier's presence, however, offered him another opportunity; it gave him the chance to solve the mystery of Cosette's fortune.
'Thenardier,' he said. 'Shall I tell you the secret that you were planning to sell me? I, too, have sources of information, and probably know more about the subject than you do. Jean Valjean, as you say, is a murderer and a thief. He's a thief because he robbed a wealthy manufacturer and mayor of Montreuil, M. Madeleine. Jean Valjean, who knew the mayor's background, reported him to the police and took advantage of his arrest to take over half a million francs from his Paris bank. The manager of the bank told me this himself. And he murdered the policeman, Javert. I know this because I was there at the time.'
Thenardier looked puzzled for a moment, then said, 'Monsieur, I think you are mistaken.'
'What! Are you denying what I said? Those are facts!'
'They are incorrect, and I do not like to hear a man unjustly accused. Jean Valjean did not rob M. Madeleine, nor did he kill Javert.'
'How do you know?'
'First, he did not kill M. Madeleine because he was M. Madeleine! And second, he did not kill Javert because Javert killed himself. He killed himself by jumping into the river.'
'What proof do you have?' Marius said, wide-eyed with disbelief.
'I have all the proof here,' Thenardier said, producing an envelope in which there were several documents and newspaper articles. 'I've spent a long time discovering the truth about Jean Valjean.'
Marius studied the documents carefully, then looked up with a smile of joy. 'But he's a splendid man! The fortune was really his, and he's not a murderer or thief at all! He's a hero and a saint!'
'He's a thief and a murderer,'Thenardier said quietly.
'What do you mean?'
'I told you that I do not like to see a man accused unjustly, but I do like to see a man punished for crimes he has committed.'
'And what crimes are those?'
Thenardier sat down and told Marius about the time he had helped Valjean to escape from the Paris sewer.
'He was carrying the body of a man he had robbed and killed,' Thenardier said. 'Look, I have a piece of cloth from the dead man's coat as proof.'
He produced a muddy piece of cloth and showed it to Marius, who immediately went pale and rose unsteadily to his feet. As Thenardier continued to talk, Marius opened a cupboard door and took out a coat.
'That man was me!' Marius cried. 'And here is the coat I was wearing!'
Thenardier stared at the coat and the cloth in his hands, speechless with fear. He was even more surprised when, instead of chasing him out of the room, Marius ran towards him and pressed several thousand-franc notes into his hand.
'You're a terrible man,' Marius said. 'A thief and a liar. You came here to destroy a man, but you have done the opposite. If you hadn't saved my father's life at Waterloo, I'd report you to the police. I know that your wife is dead, but take the money and start a new life in America with your daughter. When you arrive there, I'll send you another 20,000 francs. Now get out. I never want to see you again!'
When Thenardier had left, unable to believe his good fortune, Marius ran to find Cosette and told her everything immediately.
'We must go to him at once,' Marius said. 'He was the man who saved my life. We must waste no time!'
Minutes later, he and Cosette were travelling in a carriage to Number 7, rue de l'Homme-Arme.
Jean Valjean looked up when he heard the knock on his door and called in a weak voice, 'Come in.'
The door opened and Marius and Cosette appeared. Cosette rushed to the chair where Jean Valjean was sitting.
'Father!' she cried, falling into his arms.
'So you've forgiven me?' Valjean whispered, hugging Cosette to him and turning to Marius.
'Cosette, did you hear what he said?' Marius cried, tears of shame and guilt rolling down his cheeks. 'He asked me to forgive him. And do you know what he did? He saved my life and he brought me back to you. He came to the barricade to save me, just as he saved Javert. He carried me on his back through the sewers of Paris, to bring me to you. Oh Cosette, I feel so ashamed of the way I've treated him!'
'You have no need to say all this,' Valjean murmured.
'Why didn't you say it yourself?' Marius demanded. 'Why didn't you tell me that you were M. Madeleine and that you saved Javert's life at the barricade? Why didn't you tell me that I owed you my life?'
'Because I thought it would be better to break away. If you had known the truth, you would have felt obliged to be good to me, a worthless criminal. That would have upset everything.'
'What or whom would it have upset?' Marius said. 'Well, we're not going to allow you to stay here on your own. You're going to come home with us. You're Cosette's father and mine. I won't allow you to spend another day here.'
'And you can't refuse this time,' Cosette agreed, sitting on Jean Valjean's lap and kissing his forehead. 'There's a carriage waiting for you. I'm kidnapping you - by force, if necessary!'
Jean Valjean listened as she described the view from the room that would be his, the beauty of the garden, the singing of the birds, but he was listening more to the music of her voice than to the meaning of her words. Finally, he said, 'Yes, it would be delightful, but
Cosette, frightened, took his two hands in hers.
'Your hands are so cold,' she said. 'Are you ill? Are you in pain?'
'No,' said Valjean. 'I'm not in pain. But
'But what?'
'I'm going to die soon.'
'Father, no!' Cosette cried. 'You're going to live! You must live, do you understand?'
Marius and Cosette both did their best to raise Valjean's spirits, to show him how much they loved and needed him, to fill him with the strength and the desire to live again. But it was too late. Valjean smiled, his eyes shining with love and happiness, but he was beginning to lose strength.
'To die is nothing,' he murmured. 'But it is terrible not to live.'
Then, taking Cosette's sleeve and pressing it to his lips, he said, 'Come close to me, both of you. I love you dearly. How sweet it is to die like this. And you love me too, dear Cosette. You'll feel some grief for me, but not too much. I want you to have no great sorrows. You must enjoy life, my children. I'm leaving the two candlesticks by the bed to Cosette. They're made of silver, but to me they are pure gold. I don't know whether the person who gave them to me is pleased as he looks down on me from above. I've done my best. You mustn't forget, my children, that, despite my money, I am one of the poor.'
As he spoke, Valjean's breathing became more painful and he had difficulty moving his arms. But as the weakness of his body increased, his spirit grew in strength. The light of an unknown world was shining brightly in his eyes.
'Now, Cosette,' he breathed softly, 'the time has come for me to tell you your mother's name. It was Fantine. You must not forget it. Your mother loved you greatly and she suffered greatly. She was as rich in sorrow as you are in happiness. That is how God balances things out. He watches us all from above and knows what he is doing among his splendid stars. And now I must leave you, my children. Love one another always. There is nothing else that matters in this world except love.'
Cosette and Marius fell to their knees on either side of him, holding back their tears. Jean Valjean's hands rested on their bowed heads, and did not move again. He lay back with his head turned to the sky, the light from the two silver candlesticks falling on his smiling, peaceful face.
Before the War
In the last years of the nineteenth century, no one believed that this world was being watched closely by intelligences greater than our own. We had no idea that we were being studied almost as carefully as a scientist studies the small creatures in a drop of water. With great confidence, people travelled around this world and believed that they were in control of their lives. No one gave a thought to possible threats from other planets.
At most, people believed there might be living things on Mars, perhaps less developed than us and ready to welcome visitors. But across the great emptiness of space, more intelligent minds than ours looked at this Earth with jealous eyes, and slowly and surely made their plans against us. And early in the twentieth century, the great shock came.
The planet Mars, I need not remind the reader, goes around the sun at an average distance of 224,000,000 kilometres, and receives from the sun half of the light and heat that is received by this world. It must be, if scientific thinking is correct, older than our world, and life on its surface began a long time before this Earth cooled down. Because it is hardly one seventh of the size of Earth, it cooled more quickly to the temperature at which life could begin. It has air and water and all that is necessary to support living things.
But people are so blind that no writer, before the end of the nineteenth century, suggested that much more intelligent life had developed there than on Earth. It was also not generally understood that because Mars is older and smaller than our Earth, and further from the sun, it is nearer life's end as well as further from its beginning.
Mars is getting colder, as one day our planet must too. Its physical condition is still largely a mystery, but we know that even in the middle of the day, in its warmest areas, the temperature is lower than during our coldest winter. Its air is much thinner than ours, its oceans have become smaller until they cover only a third of its surface, and from its far north and south the ice is steadily moving forwards. The end of all life, which is a distant possibility for us, is an immediate problem for the Martians.
This has brightened their intelligence, increased their abilities and hardened their hearts. And looking across space, with instruments and minds more powerful than we can dream of, they see, at a distance of only 56,000,000 kilometres, a morning star of hope - our own warmer planet with its green land and grey seas, its cloudy atmosphere and its growing population.
We, the people who live on this Earth, must seem to them at least as different and less developed as monkeys are to us. And before we criticize them for thinking in this way, we must remember how badly we have treated not only the animals of this planet, but also other people. Can we really complain that the Martians treated us in the same way?
It seems that the Martians calculated their journey very cleverly - their mathematical knowledge appears to be much more developed than ours. During 1894, a great light was seen on the surface of the planet by a number of astronomers. I now believe that this was a fire built to make an enormous gun in a very deep pit. From this gun, their shots were fired at us.
The attack came six years ago. Towards midnight on 12 August, one astronomer noticed a great cloud of hot gas on the surface of the planet. In fact, he compared it to the burning gases that might rush out from a gun.
This, we now know, was a very accurate description. However, the next day there was no report in the newspapers except one small note in the Daily Telegraph, and the world knew nothing of one of the greatest dangers that ever threatened Earth.
I do not think I would have known anything about it myself if I had not met Ogilvy, the well-known astronomer. He was very excited at the news and invited me to spend the night with him, watching the red planet.
Despite everything that has happened since, I still remember that night very clearly. Looking through the telescope, I saw a circle of deep blue with the little round planet in the centre. Because it was so small, I did not see the Thing they were sending us, which was flying quickly towards me across that great distance. I never dreamed of it then, as I watched. Nobody on Earth knew anything about the approaching missile.
That night, too, there was another sudden cloud of gas from the distant planet as a second missile started on its way to Earth from Mars, just under twenty-four hours after the first one. I saw a reddish flash at the edge, the slightest bend in its shape, as the clock struck midnight.
I remember how I sat there in the blackness, not suspecting the meaning of the tiny light I had seen and all the trouble that it would cause me. I told Ogilvy, and he took my place and watched the cloud of gas growing as it rose from the surface of the planet. He watched until one, and then we lit the lamp and walked over to his house.
Hundreds of observers saw the flame that night and the following night, at about midnight, and again the night after that. For ten nights they saw a flame each night. No one on Earth has attempted to explain why the shots ended after this. It may be that the gases from the firing caused the Martians inconvenience. Thick clouds of smoke or dust, which looked like little grey, moving spots through a powerful telescope on Earth, spread through the clearness of the planet's atmosphere and hid its more familiar features.
Even the daily papers woke up to these events at last, and there was much discussion of their cause. But no one suspected the truth, that the Martians had fired missiles, which were now rushing towards us at a speed of many kilometres a second across the great emptiness of space.
It seems to me almost unbelievably wonderful that, with that danger threatening us, people could continue their ordinary business as they did. One night, when the first missile was probably less than 15,000,000 kilometres away, I went for a walk with my wife. I pointed out Mars, a bright spot of light rising in the sky, towards which so many telescopes were pointing.
The night was warm. Coming home, a group of party-goers from Chertsey passed us, singing and playing music. There were lights in the upper windows of the houses as people went to bed. From the distant railway station came the sound of trains. The world seemed so safe and peaceful.
The Falling Star
Only a few nights later, the first falling star was seen towards the east. Denning, our greatest astronomer, said that the height of its first appearance was about one hundred and fifty kilometres. It seemed to him that it fell to Earth about a hundred kilometres east of him.
I was at home at the time and writing in my study with the curtains open. If I had looked up I would have seen the strangest thing that ever fell to Earth from space, but I did not. Many people in that part of England saw it, and simply thought that another meteorite had fallen. Nobody went to look for the fallen star that night.
But poor Ogilvy had seen it fall and so he got up very early with the idea of finding it. This he did, soon after dawn. An enormous hole had been made and the Earth had been thrown violently in every direction, forming piles that could be seen two kilometres away.
The Thing itself lay almost completely buried in the earth. The uncovered part looked like an enormous cylinder, about thirty metres across each end. It was covered with a thick burnt skin, which softened its edges. He approached it, surprised at the size and even more surprised at the shape, since most meteorites are fairly round. It was, however, still very hot from its flight through the air and he could not get close to it. He could hear movement from inside but thought this was due to it cooling down. He did not imagine that it might be hollow.
He remained standing on one side of the pit that the Thing had made for itself, staring at its strange appearance and thinking that there might be some intelligent design in its shape. He was alone on the common.
Then suddenly, he noticed that some of the burnt skin was falling off the round edge at the end. A large piece suddenly came off with a sharp noise that brought his heart into his mouth. For a minute he hardly realized what this meant, and although the heat was great, he climbed down into the pit to see the cylinder more closely. He realized that, very slowly, the round top of the cylinder was turning.
Even then he hardly understood what was happening, until he heard another sound and saw the black mark jump forwards a little. Then he suddenly understood. The cylinder was artificial - hollow - with an end that screwed out! Something inside the cylinder was unscrewing the top!
'Good heavens!' said Ogilvy. 'There's a man in it - men in it! Half burnt to death! Trying to escape!'
At once, thinking quickly, he connected the Thing with the flash on Mars.
The thought of the creature trapped inside was so terrible to him that he forgot the heat, and went forwards to the cylinder to help. But luckily the heat stopped him before he could get his hands on the metal. He stood undecided for a moment, then climbed out of the pit and started to run into Woking.
The time then was around six o'clock. He met some local people who were up early, but the story he told and his appearance were so wild that they would not listen to him. That quieted him a little, and when he saw Henderson, the London journalist, in his garden, he shouted over the fence and made himself understood.
'Henderson,' he called, 'you saw that meteorite last night?'
'Yes,' said Henderson. 'What about it?'
'It's out on Horsell Common now.'
'Fallen meteorite!' said Henderson. 'That's good.'
'But it's something more than a meteorite. It's a cylinder - an artificial cylinder! And there's something inside.'
'What did you say?' he asked. He was deaf in one ear.
When Ogilvy told him all he had seen, Henderson dropped his spade, put on his jacket and came out into the road. The two men hurried back at once to the common, and found the cylinder still lying in the same position. But now the sounds inside had stopped, and a thin circle of bright metal showed between its top and body.
They listened, knocked on the burnt metal with a rock and, getting no answer, they both decided that the men inside were either unconscious or dead.
Of course the two were quite unable to do anything, so they went back to the town again to get help. Henderson went to the railway station at once, to send a telegram to London.
By eight o'clock a number of boys and unemployed men were already walking to the common to see the 'dead men from Mars'. That was the form the story took. I heard it first from my newspaper boy at about a quarter to nine and I went to the common immediately.
When I got there, I found a little crowd of perhaps twenty people surrounding the great pit in which the cylinder lay. Henderson and Ogilvy were not there. I think they understood that nothing could be done for the moment, and had gone away to have breakfast at Henderson's house. I climbed into the pit and thought I heard a faint movement under my feet. The top had certainly stopped turning.
At that time it was quite clear in my own mind that the Thing had come from the planet Mars, and I felt impatient to see it opened. At about eleven, as nothing was happening, I walked back, full of such thoughts, to my home in Maybury.
By the afternoon the appearance of the common had changed very much. The early editions of the evening papers had shocked London. They printed stories like:
There was now a large crowd of people standing around. Going to the edge of the pit, I found a group of men in it - Henderson, Ogilvy, and a tall fair-haired man I afterwards learnt was Stent, the Astronomer Royal, with several workmen holding spades. Stent was giving directions. A large part of the cylinder had now been uncovered, although its lower end was still hidden in the side of the pit.
As soon as Ogilvy saw me, he called me to come down, and asked me if I would mind going over to see Lord Hilton, who owned the land. The growing crowd, he said, was now becoming a serious problem, especially the boys. He wanted a fence put up to keep the people back.
I was very glad to do as he asked. I failed to find Lord Hilton at his house, but was told he was expected from London by the six o'clock train. As it was then about a quarter past five, I went home, had some tea and walked up to the station to meet him.
The Cylinder Opens
When I returned to the common, the sun was setting. Groups of people were hurrying from the direction of Woking. The crowd around the pit had increased to a couple of hundred people, perhaps. There were raised voices, and some sort of struggle appeared to be going on around the pit. As I got nearer, I heard Stent's voice:
'Keep back! Keep back! '
A boy came running towards me.
'It's moving,' he said to me as he passed, '- unscrewing and unscrewing. I don't like it. I'm going home.'
I went on to the crowd and pushed my way through. Everyone seemed greatly excited. I heard a peculiar humming sound from the pit.
'Keep those fools back,' said Ogilvy. 'We don't know what's in the Thing, you know.'
I saw a young man - I believe he was a shop assistant in Woking - standing on the cylinder and trying to climb out of the pit again. The crowd had pushed him in.
The end of the cylinder was being screwed out from within. Nearly half a meter of shining screw stuck out. Someone pushed against me, and I almost fell down on top of the screw. I turned, and as I did the screw came out and the lid of the cylinder fell onto the sand with a ringing sound. I pressed back against the person behind me, and turned my head towards the Thing again. I had the sunset in my eyes and for a moment the round hole seemed black.
I think everyone expected to see a man come out - possibly something a little unlike us on Earth, but more or less a man. I know I did. But, looking, I soon saw something grey moving within the shadow, then two shining circles - like eyes. Then something like a little grey snake, about the thickness of a walking-stick, came out of the middle and moved through the air towards me - and then another.
I suddenly felt very cold. There was a loud scream from a woman behind. I half-turned, still keeping my eyes on the cylinder, from which other tentacles were now coming out, and began pushing my way back from the side of the pit. I saw shock changing to horror on the faces of the people around me, and there was a general movement backwards. I found myself alone, and saw the people on the other side of the pit running off. I looked again at the cylinder, and felt great terror.
A big, greyish round creature, the size, perhaps, of a bear, was rising slowly and painfully out of the cylinder. As it moved up and caught the light, it shone like wet leather. Two large dark- colored eyes were looking at me steadily. The head of the thing was rounded and had, one could say, a face. There was a mouth under the eyes, and its lipless edge shone wetly. The whole creature was breathing heavily. One tentacle held onto the cylinder; another moved in the air.
Suddenly, the creature disappeared. It had fallen over the edge of the cylinder and into the pit. I heard it give a peculiar cry, and then another of these creatures appeared in the deep shadow of the door.
I turned and ran madly towards the first group of trees, perhaps a hundred metres away. I fell a number of times because I was running with my head turned round. I could not take my eyes away from these creatures.
The common was now covered with small groups of people. They were all very frightened, but still interested in the strange happenings in the pit. Then I saw a round object moving up and down. It was the head of the shop assistant who had fallen in, looking black against the hot western sky. He got his shoulder and knee up, but again he seemed to slip back until only his head was visible. Then he disappeared, and I thought I heard a faint scream. For a moment I wanted to go back and help him, but I was too afraid.
The sun went down before anything else happened. The crowd around the pit seemed to grow as new people arrived. This gave people confidence and as darkness fell, a slow, uncertain movement on the common began. Black figures in twos and threes moved forwards, stopped, watched, and moved again, getting closer and closer to the pit.
And then, coming from the direction of Horsell, I noticed a little black group of men, the first of whom was waving a white flag. They were too far away for me to recognize anyone there, but I learned afterwards that Ogilvy, Stent and Henderson were with others in this attempt at communication. As the group moved forwards, a number of other people started to follow them.
Suddenly, there was a flash of light and bright greenish smoke came out of the pit in three separate clouds, which moved up, one after the other, into the still air.
The smoke (or flame, perhaps, would be a better word for it) was so bright that the deep blue sky overhead seemed to darken as these clouds rose. At the same time we could hear a faint sound, which changed into a long, loud humming noise. Slowly a dark shape rose out of the pit and a beam of light seemed to flash out from it.
Then flashes of bright fire came from the men, and I realized that the Martians were using some kind of invisible ray. Then, by the light of their own burning, I saw each of the men falling, and their followers turning to run.
I stood staring, watching as man after man fell over. As the unseen ray of light passed over them, trees caught fire and even the bushes exploded into flame. And far away to the west I saw flashes of trees and bushes and wooden buildings suddenly set on fire.
This flaming death, this invisible sword of heat, was sweeping round quickly and steadily. I knew it was coming towards me because of the flashing bushes it touched, but I was too shocked to move. All along a curving line beyond the pit, the dark ground smoked. Then the humming stopped and the black, rounded object sank slowly out of sight into the pit.
All this happened so quickly that I stood without moving, shocked by the flashes of light. It that death had swung round a full circle, it would have killed me. But it passed and let me live, and left the night around me suddenly dark and unfamiliar. There was nobody else around. Overhead the stars were coming out, and in the west the sky was still a pale, bright, almost greenish blue. The tops of the trees and the roofs of Horsell were sharp and black against the western sky. Areas of bush and a few trees still smoked, and the houses towards Woking station were sending up tongues of flame into the stillness of the evening air.
I realized that I was helpless and alone on this dark common. Suddenly, like a thing falling on me from above, came fear. With an effort I turned and began an unsteady run through the grass.
The fear I felt was panic - terror not only of the Martians but of the dark and stillness all around me. I ran crying silently as a child might do. After I had turned, I did not dare look back.
Mars Attacks
I ran until I was totally exhausted and I fell down beside the road. That was near the bridge by the gas-works.
I remained there for some time.
Eventually I sat up, strangely puzzled. For a moment, perhaps, I could not clearly understand how I came there. My terror had fallen from me like a piece of clothing. A few minutes earlier there had only been three things in my mind: the great size of the night and space and nature, my own weakness and unhappiness, and the near approach of death. Now I was my normal self again - an ordinary citizen. The silent common, my escape, the flames, seemed like a dream. I asked myself if these things had really happened. I could not believe it.
I got up and walked up the steep slope to the bridge. My body seemed to have lost its strength. The figure of a workman carrying a basket appeared. Beside him ran a little boy He passed me, wishing me good-night. I thought about speaking to him, but did not. I answered his greeting and went on over the bridge.
Two men and a woman were talking at the gate of one of the houses. I stopped.
'What news from the common?' I said.
'Eh?' said one of the men, turning.
'What news from the common?' I repeated.
'Haven't you just been there?' the men asked.
'People seem fairly silly about the common,' the woman said over the gate. 'What's it all about?'
'Haven't you heard of the men from Mars?' I said. 'The creatures from Mars.'
'Quite enough,' said the woman. 'Thanks.' And all three of them laughed.
I felt foolish and angry. I tried but could not tell them what I had seen. They laughed again at my broken sentences.
'You'll hear more soon," I said, and went on to my home.
My wife was shocked when she saw me, because I looked so tired and dirty. I went into the dining-room, sat down, and told her the things that I had seen.
'There is one good thing,' I said, to calm her fears. 'They are the slowest, fattest things I ever saw crawl. They may stay in the pit and kill people who come near them, as they cannot get out of it . . . but they are so horrible!'
'Don't, dear!' said my wife, putting her hand on mine.
'Poor Ogilvy!' I said. 'He may be lying dead there.'
My wife, at least, did not think my experience unbelievable.
When I saw how white her face was, I began to comfort her and myself by repeating all that Ogilvy had told me about the impossibility of Martians capturing the Earth.
On the surface of the Earth the force of gravity is three times as great as on the surface of Mars. A Martian, therefore, would weigh three times more than on Mars, although his strength would be the same. That was the general opinion. Both The Times and the Daily Telegraph, for example, said this very confidently the next morning. Both ignored, as I did, two obvious problems with this theory.
The atmosphere of Earth, we now know, contains much more oxygen than there is on Mars. This certainly gave the Martians much greater strength. And we also learned that the Martians were so mechanically clever that they did not need to use their bodies very much.
But I did not consider these points at the time, and so I thought the Martians had very little chance of success. With wine and food and the need to help my wife feel less afraid, I slowly became braver and felt safer.
I remember the dinner table that evening very clearly even now: my dear wife's sweet, worried face looking at me from under the pink lamp-shade, the white cloth laid with silver and glass, the glass of red wine in my hand. I did not know it, but that was the last proper dinner I would eat for many strange and terrible days.
If, on that Friday night, you had drawn a circle at a distance of five kilometres from Horsell Common, I doubt if there would have been one human being outside it, unless it was a relation of Stent, whose emotions or habits were affected by the new arrivals. Many people had heard of the cylinder, of course, and talked about it, but it did not have as much effect as a political event.
Even within the five - kilometer circle, most people were unaffected. I have already described the behaviour of the people to whom I spoke. All over the district people were eating dinner. Men were gardening, children were being put to bed, young people were out walking together.
Maybe there was talk in the village streets, a new topic in the pubs - and here and there a messenger, or even an eye-witness of the later events, caused some excitement. However, for most of the time the daily routine of work, food, drink and sleep went on as it had done for countless years.
People came to the common and left it, but all the time a crowd remained. One or two adventurous people went into the darkness and crawled quite near the Martians, but they never returned, because now and again a light-ray swept round the common, and the Heat-Ray was ready to follow. And all night the sound of hammering could be heard as the Martians worked on the machines they were making ready.
At about eleven, a company of soldiers came through Horsell and spread out in a great circle around the common. Several officers had been on the common earlier in the day and one was reported to be missing. Another one arrived and was busy questioning the crowd at midnight. The army was certainly taking things seriously.
A few seconds after midnight the crowd in the Chertsey Road, Woking, saw a star fall from the sky into the woods to the north-west. This was the second cylinder.
Saturday lives in my memory as a day of worry. It was a lazy, hot day too. I had only slept a little and I got up early. I went into my garden and stood listening, but towards the common there was nothing moving.
The milkman came as usual and I asked him the latest news. He told me that during the night the Martians had been surrounded by soldiers and that field-guns were expected.
'We have to try not to kill them,' he said, 'if it can possibly be avoided.'
After breakfast, instead of working, I decided to walk down towards the common. Under the railway bridge I found a group of soldiers - engineers, I think, men wearing small round caps, dirty red jackets and dark trousers. They told me that no one was allowed over the bridge. I talked with them for a time and told them of my sight of the Martians on the previous evening. None had seen them, so they asked me many questions. An ordinary engineer is much better educated than a common soldier, and they discussed, with some intelligence, the odd conditions of the possible fight.
After some time I left them and went on to the railway station to get as many morning papers as I could. These contained only very inaccurate descriptions of the killing of Stent, Henderson, Ogilvy and the others. I got back to lunch at about two, very tired because, as I have said, the day was extremely hot and dull. To make myself feel better I took a cold bath in the afternoon.
During that day the Martians did not show themselves. They were busy in the pit, and there was the sound of hammering and a column of smoke. 'New attempts have been made to signal, but without success,' was how the evening papers later described it. An engineer told me that this was done by a man crawling forwards with a flag on a long pole. The Martians took as much notice of him as we would of a cow.
At about three o'clock I heard the sound of a gun, firing regularly, from the direction of Chertsey. I learned that they were shooting into the wood in which the second cylinder had fallen. An hour or two later a field-gun arrived for use against the first cylinder.
At about six in the evening, as I had tea with my wife in the garden, I heard an explosion from the common, and immediately after that the sound of gunfire. Then came a violent crash quite close to us, that shook the ground. I rushed out onto the grass and saw the tops of the trees around the Oriental College burst into smoky red flame, and the tower of the little church beside it slide down into ruins. The roof of the college was in pieces. Then one of our chimneys cracked and broken bricks fell down onto the flower-bed by my study window.
My wife and I stood amazed. Then I realized that the Martians could hit the top of Maybury Hill with their Heat-Ray because they had cleared the college out of the way.
After that I took my wife's arm and ran with her out into the road. Then I went back and fetched the servant.
'We can't stay here,' I said, and as I spoke the firing started again for a moment on the common.
'But where can we go?' said my wife in terror.
I thought, puzzled. Then I remembered my cousins in Leatherhead.
'Leatherhead!' I shouted above the sudden noise.
She looked away from me downhill. Surprised people were coming out of their houses.
'How will we get to Leatherhead?' she asked.
Down the hill I saw some soldiers rush under the railway bridge. Three went through the open doors of the Oriental College and two began running from house to house. The sun, shining through the smoke that rose up from the tops of the trees, seemed blood-red and threw an unfamiliar bright light on everything.
'Wait here,' I said. 'You are safe here.'
I ran at once towards the pub, whose owner had a horse and cart. I ran because I realized that soon everyone on this side of the hill would be moving. I found the pub's owner in his bar, with no idea of what was going on. I explained quickly that I had to leave my home, and arranged to borrow the cart, promising to bring it back before midnight. At the time it did not seem to me so urgent that he should leave his home.
I drove the cart down the road and, leaving it with my wife and servant, rushed into the house and packed a few valuables. While I was doing this, a soldier ran past. He was going from house to house, warning people to leave.
I shouted after him, 'What news?'
He turned, stared, shouted something about 'crawling out in a thing like a dish cover', and moved on to the gate of the next house. I helped my servant into the back of the cart, then jumped up into the driver's seat beside my wife. In another moment we were clear of the smoke and the noise, and moving quickly down the opposite side of Maybury Hill.
Running Away
Leatherhead is about twenty kilometres from Maybury. We got there without any problems at about nine o'clock, and the horse had an hour's rest while I had supper with my cousins and left my wife in their care.
My wife was strangely silent during the drive, and seemed very worried. If I had not made a promise to the pub owner, she would, I think, have asked me to stay in Leatherhead that night. Her face, I remember, was very white as I drove away.
My feelings were quite different. I had been very excited all day and I was not sorry that I had to return to Maybury. I was even afraid that the last shots I had heard might mean the end of our visitors from Mars. I wanted to be there at the death.
The night was unexpectedly dark, and it was as hot and airless as the day. Overhead the clouds were passing fast, mixed here and there with clouds of black and red smoke, although no wind moved the bushes around me. I heard a church strike midnight, and then I saw Maybury Hill, with its tree-tops and roofs black and sharp against the red sky.
At that moment a bright green light lit up the road around me and showed the distant woods to the north. I saw a line of green fire pass through the moving clouds and into the field to my left. It was the third cylinder!
Just after this came the first lightning of the storm, and the thunder burst like a gun overhead. The horse ran forwards in terror at high speed.
There is a gentle slope towards the foot of Maybury Hill, and down this we went. After the lightning had begun, it flashed again and again, as quickly as I have ever seen. The thunder crashed almost all the time. The flashing light was blinding and confusing, and thin rain hit my face as I drove down the slope.
I paid little attention to the road in front of me, and then suddenly my attention was caught by something. At first I thought it was the wet roof of a house, but the lightning flashes showed that it was moving quickly down Maybury Hill. Then there was a great flash like daylight and this strange object could be seen clearly.
How can I describe this Thing that I saw? It was an enormous tripod, higher than many houses, stepping over the young trees. It was a walking engine of shining metal.
Then suddenly, the trees in the wood ahead of me were pushed to the side and a second enormous tripod appeared, rushing, as it seemed, straight towards me. And I was driving fast to meet it. At the sight of this second machine I panicked completely. I pulled my horse's head hard round to the right. The cart turned over on the horse and I was thrown sideways. I fell heavily into a shallow pool of water.
I crawled out almost immediately and lay, my feet still in the water, under a bush. The horse did not move (his neck was broken, poor animal!) and by the lightning flashes I saw the turned-over cart and one wheel still spinning slowly. Then the enormous machine walked past me and went uphill.
As it passed it gave a deafening howl that was louder than the thunder - 'Aloo! Aloo!' - and a minute later it was with another one, half a kilometer away, bending over something in a field. I have no doubt that this was the third of the cylinders they had fired at us from Mars.
I was wet with rain above and pool-water below. It was some time before my shock would let me struggle up into a drier position, or think of the great danger I was in.
I got to my feet at last and, keeping low, managed to get into a wood near Maybury without the machines seeing me. Staying in the wood, I moved towards my own house. If I had really understood the meaning of all the things I had seen, I would have gone back to join my wife in Leatherhead immediately. But that night it was all very strange and I was physically exhausted, wet to the skin, deafened and blinded by the storm. All these things prevented me from making a sensible decision.
I walked up the narrow road towards my house. Near the top I stood on something soft and, by a flash of lightning, saw the body of a man. I had never touched a dead body before, but I forced myself to turn him over and feel for his heart. He certainly was dead. It seemed that his neck had been broken. Then the lightning flashed again and I saw his face. It was the owner of the pub, whose cart I had taken.
I stepped over him nervously and moved on up the hill. Towards Maybury Bridge there were voices and the sound of feet, but I did not have the courage to shout or go to them. I let myself into my house and locked the door, walked to the bottom of the stairs and sat down, shaking violently.
It was some time before I could get to my feet again and put on some dry clothes. After that I went upstairs to my study. The window looks over the trees and the railway towards Horsell Common. In the hurry to leave it had been left open. I stopped in the doorway, at a safe distance from it.
The thunderstorm had passed. The towers of the Oriental College and the trees around it had gone. Very far away, lit by red fire, the common was visible. Across the light, great black shapes moved busily backwards and forwards.
I closed the door noiselessly and moved nearer the window. The view opened out until, on one side, it reached to the houses around Woking Station, and on the other, to the burnt woods of Byfleet. Between them were areas of fire and smoking ground. The view reminded me, more than anything else, of factories at night.
I turned my desk chair to the window and stared out at the country and, in particular, at the three enormous black Things that were moving around the common. They seemed very busy. I began to ask myself what they could be. Were they intelligent machines? I felt this was impossible. Or did a Martian sit inside each, controlling it in the same way that a man's brain controls his body?
The storm had left the sky clear, and over the smoke of the burning land the tiny bright light of Mars was dropping into the west, when a soldier came quietly into my garden. I got up and leant out of the window.
'Psst!' I said, in a whisper.
He stopped for a moment, then walked across to the house.
'Who's there?' he said, also whispering.
'Are you trying to hide?' I asked.
'I am.'
'Come into the house,' I said.
I went down, opened the door and let him in. I could not see his face. He had no hat and his coat was unbuttoned.
'What's happened?' I asked.
'We didn't have a chance.' he said. 'Not a chance.'
He followed me into the dining-room.
'Have a drink,' I said, pouring one for him.
He drank it. Then suddenly he sat down at the table, put his head on his arms and began to cry like a little boy. It was a long time before he was able to answer my questions, and the answers he gave were puzzled and came in broken sentences.
He was part of a field-gun team. They were turning their gun to fire on one of the tripods when it suddenly exploded. He found himself lying under a group of burnt dead men and horses. His back was hurt by the fall of a horse and he lay there for a long time. He watched as the foot-soldiers rushed towards the tripod. They all went down in a second. Then the tripod walked slowly over the common. A kind of arm held a complicated metal case, out of which the Heat-Ray flashed as it killed anyone who was still moving. Then the tripod turned and walked away towards where the second cylinder lay.
At last the soldier was able to move, crawling at first, and he got to Woking. There were a few people still alive there; most of them were very frightened, and many of them had been burnt. He hid behind a broken wall as one of the Martian tripods returned. He saw this one go after a man, catch him in one of its steel arms and knock his head against a tree. After it got dark, the soldier finally ran and managed to get across the railway.
That was the story I got from him, bit by bit. He grew calmer telling me. He had eaten no food since midday, and I found some meat and bread and brought it into the room. As we talked, the sky gradually became lighter. I began to see his face, blackened and exhausted, as no doubt mine was too.
When we had finished eating, we went quietly upstairs to my study and I looked again out of the open window. In one night the valley had become a place of death. The fires had died down now, but the ruins of broken and burnt-out houses and blackened trees were clear in the cold light of the dawn. Destruction had never been so total in the history of war. And, shining in the morning light, three of the tripods stood on the common, their tops turning as they examined the damage they had done.
The Death of Towns
As the dawn grew brighter, we moved back from the window where we had watched and went very quietly downstairs.
The soldier agreed with me that the house was not a good place to stay in. He suggested going towards London, where he could rejoin his company. My plan was to return at once to Leatherhead. The strength of the Martians worried me so much that I had decided to take my wife to the south coast, and leave the country with her immediately. I had already decided that the area around London would be the scene of a great battle before the Martians could be destroyed.
Between us and Leatherhead, however, lay the third cylinder. If I had been alone, I think I would have taken my chance and gone straight across country. But the soldier persuaded me not to. 'It's no kindness to your wife,' he said, 'for you to get killed.' In the end I agreed to go north with him under cover of the woods. After that I would leave him and turn off to reach Leatherhead.
I wanted to start at once, but the soldier had been in wars before and knew better than that. He made me find all the food and drink that we could carry, and we filled our pockets. Then we left the house and ran as quickly as we could down the narrow road. All the houses seemed empty. In the road lay a pile of three burnt bodies close together, killed by the Heat-Ray. In fact, apart from ourselves, there did not seem to be a living person on Maybury Hill.
We reached the woods at the foot of the hill and moved through these towards the road. As we ran, we heard the sound of horses and saw through the trees three soldiers riding towards Woking. We shouted and they stopped while we hurried towards them. They were an officer and two men.
'You are the first people I've seen coming this way this morning,' the officer said. 'What's happening?'
The soldier who had stayed with me stepped up to him. 'My gun was destroyed last night, sir. I've been hiding. I'm trying to rejoin my company. You'll come in sight of the Martians, I expect, about a kilometer along this road.'
'What do they look like?' asked the officer.
'Big machines, sir. Thirty metres high. Three legs and a great big head, sir.'
'What nonsense!' said the officer.
'You'll see, sir. They carry a kind of box that shoots fire and strikes you dead.'
'What do you mean - a gun?'
'No, sir.' And he began to describe the Heat-Ray.
Half-way through his report the officer interrupted him and looked at me.
'Did you see it?' he said.
'It's perfectly true,' I replied.
'Well,' he said. 'I suppose it's my business to see it too. Listen,' he said to my new friend, 'you'd better go to Weybridge and report to the highest officer.'
He thanked me and they rode away.
By Byfleet station we came out from the trees and found the country calm and peaceful in the morning sunlight. It seemed like any other Sunday - except for the empty houses, and the other ones where people were packing.
However, Byfleet was very busy. Soldiers were telling people to leave and helping them to load carts in the main street. Many people, though, did not realize how serious the situation was. I saw one old man with a big box and a number of flower-pots, angrily arguing with a soldier who wanted him to leave them behind.
'Do you know what's over there?' I said, pointing towards the woods that hid the Martians.
'Eh?' he said. 'I was explaining that these are valuable.'
'Death!' I shouted. 'Death is coming! Death!' and leaving him to think about that, I hurried on to Weybridge.
We remained there until midday, and at that time found ourselves at the place where the River Wey joins the River Thames. Here we found an excited crowd of people. There was no great fear at this time, but already there were more people than all the boats could carry across the Thames. Every now and then people looked nervously at the fields beyond Chertsey, but everything there was still.
Then came the sound of a gun and, almost immediately, other guns across the river, unseen because of the trees, began to fire. Everyone stood still, stopped by the sudden sound of battle, near us but invisible to us.
Then we saw a cloud of smoke far away up the river. The ground moved and a heavy explosion shook the air, smashing two or three windows in the houses and leaving us shocked.
'Look!' shouted a man. 'Over there! Do you see them?'
Quickly, one after the other, one, two, three, four of the Martian machines appeared, far away over the low trees towards Chertsey. Then, from a different direction, a fifth one came towards us. Their metal bodies shone in the sun as they moved forwards to the guns. One on the left, the furthest away, held a large case high in the air, and the terrible Heat-Ray shone towards Chertsey and struck the town.
At the sight of these strange, quick and terrible creatures, the crowd near the water's edge seemed for a moment to be totally shocked. There was no screaming or shouting, but a silence. Then came some quiet talk and the beginning of movement. A woman pushed at me with her hand and rushed past me. I turned, but I was not too frightened for thought.
'Get under water!' I shouted, but nobody listened.
I turned around again and ran towards the approaching Martian, ran right down the stony beach and dived into the water. Others did the same. The stones under my feet were muddy and slippery, and the river was so low that I moved perhaps seven metres before I could get under the surface. I could hear people jumping off boats into the water.
But the Martian took no notice of us. When I lifted my head it was looking towards the guns that were still firing across the river. It was already raising the case which sent the Heat-Ray when the first shell burst six metres above its head.
I gave a cry of surprise. Then two other shells burst at the same time in the air near its body. Its head twisted round in time to receive, but not in time to avoid, the fourth shell.
This exploded right in its face. Its head flashed and burst into a dozen broken pieces of red flesh and shining metal.
'Hit!' I shouted.
The headless machine marched on, swinging from side to side. It hit a church tower, knocking it down, then moved on and fell into the river out of sight.
A violent explosion shook the air, and a column of water, steam, mud and broken metal shot far up into the sky. In another moment a great wave of very hot water came sweeping round the bend. I saw people struggling towards the shore and heard their screaming and shouting faintly above the noise of the Martian's fall.
I rushed through the water until I could see round the bend. The Martian came into sight down the river, most of it under the water. Thick clouds of steam were pouring from the wreckage, and through it I could see its long legs and tentacles moving in the water.
My attention was caught by an angry noise. A man, knee-deep in the water, shouted to me and pointed, although I could not hear what he said. Looking back, I saw the other Martians walking down the river-bank from the direction of Chertsey. The guns fired again, but with no effect.
At that moment I got under the water and, holding my breath until movement was painful, swam under the surface for as long as I could. The river was rough around me and quickly growing hotter.
When for a moment I raised my head to breathe and throw the hair and water out of my eyes, the steam was rising in a white fog that hid the Martians completely. The noise was deafening. Then I saw them, enormous grey figures. They had passed me and two were bending over the fallen one.
The third and fourth stood beside him in the water. The cases that produced the Heat-Rays were waved high and the beams flashed this way and that.
The air was full of deafening and confusing noises: the loud sounds of the Martians, the crash of falling houses, the flash of fire as trees and fences began to burn. Thick black smoke was rising to mix with the steam from the river.
Then suddenly the white flashes of the Heat-Ray came towards me. The houses fell as it touched them, and exploded into flame. The trees caught fire with a loud noise. The Heat- Ray came down to the water's edge less than fifty metres from where I stood. It ran across the river and the water behind it boiled. I turned towards the shore.
In another moment a large wave of almost boiling water rushed towards me. I screamed and ran. If my foot had slipped, it would have been the end. I fell in full view of the Martians on the stony beach. I expected only death.
I have a faknee-int memory of the foot of a Martian coming down within twenty metres of my head, going straight into the loose stones. Then I saw the four of them carrying the remains of the fallen one between them, now clear and then later faint through a curtain of smoke, moving away from me across a great space of river and fields. And then, very slowly. I realized that somehow I had escaped.
I saw an empty boat, very small and far away, moving down the river and, taking off most of my wet clothes, I swam to it. I used my hands to keep it moving, down the river towards Walton, going very slowly and often looking behind me. I was in some pain and very tired. When the bridge at Walton was coming into sight, I landed on the Middlesex bank and lay down, very sick, in the long grass.
I do not remember the arrival of the curate, so probably I slept for some time. As I woke up, I noticed a seated figure with his face staring at the sky, watching the sunset.
I sat up, and at the sound of my movement he looked at me.
'Have you any water?' I asked.
He shook his head.
'You have been asking for water for the last hour,' he said.
For a moment we were silent, staring at each other. He spoke suddenly, looking away from me.
'What does it mean? he said. 'What do these things mean?'
I gave no answer.
'Why are these things allowed? What have we done - what has Weybridge done? The morning service was over. I was walking the roads to clear my brain, and then - fire and death! All our work - everything destroyed. The church! We rebuilt it only three years ago. Gone! Why?'
Another pause, and then he shouted, 'The smoke of her burning goes up for ever and ever!' His eyes were wide and he pointed a thin finger in the direction of Weybridge.
It was clear to me that the great tragedy in which he was involved - it seemed that he had escaped from Weybridge - had driven him to the edge of madness.
'Are we far from Sunbury?' I said, very quietly.
'What can we do?' he asked. 'Are these creatures everywhere? Has the Earth been given to them?'
'Are we far from Sunbury?'
'Only this morning I was in charge of the church service -'
'Things have changed!' I said, quietly. 'You must stay calm. There is still hope.'
'Hope!'
'Yes, a lot of hope, despite all this destruction. Listen!'
From beyond the low hills across the water came the dull sound of the distant guns and a far-away strange crying. Then everything was still. High in the west the moon hung pale above the smoke and the hot, still beauty of the sunset.
'We had better follow this path,' I said. 'To the north.'
In London
My younger brother was in London when the Martians fell at Woking. He was a medical student, working for an examination, and he heard nothing of the arrival until Saturday morning. The morning papers on Saturday contained, in addition to a great deal of information about the planet Mars, one very short report.
The Martians, alarmed by the approach of a crowd, had killed a number of people with a quick-firing gun, the story said. It ended with the words, 'Although they seem frightening, the Martians have not moved from the pit into which they have fallen, and don't seem able to do so.'
Even the afternoon papers had nothing to tell apart from the movement of soldiers around the common, and the burning of the woods between Woking and Weybridge. Nothing more of the fighting was known that night, the night of my drive to Leatherhead and back.
My brother was not worried about us, as he knew from the description in the papers chat the cylinder was three kilometres from my house. That night he made up his mind to visit me, in order to see the Things before they were killed. He sent a telegram, which never reached me.
On the Saturday evening, at Waterloo station, he learned that an accident prevented trains from reaching Woking. He could not discover what kind of accident it was. In fact, the people in charge of the railway did not clearly know at that time. There was very little excitement at the station. Few people connected the problem with the Martians.
I have read, in another description of these events, that on Sunday morning 'all London was panicked by the news from Woking.' In fact, this is simply not true. Plenty of Londoners did not hear of the Martians until Monday morning. Some did, but they needed time to realize what all the reports in the Sunday papers actually meant. But most people in London do not read Sunday papers.
Besides this, Londoners are very used to feeling safe, and exciting news is so normal in the papers that they could read reports like this without great fear:
At about seven o'clock last night the Martians came out of the cylinder and, moving around in metal machines, completely destroyed Woking station and the houses around it, and killed around 600 soldiers. No details are known. Machine guns are completely useless against them, and field-guns have been put out of action. The Martians appear to be moving towards Chertsey. People in West Surrey are very worried and defenses have been built to slow the Martians' movement towards London.
No one in London knew what the Martians looked like, and there was still a fixed idea that they must be slow: 'crawling', 'moving painfully' - words like these were in all the earlier reports. But none of them were written by anyone who had actually seen a Martian. The Sunday papers printed separate editions as further news came in. But there was almost nothing to tell people until the government announced that the people of Walton and Weybridge, and all chat district, were pouring along the roads towards London.
My brother went again to Waterloo station to find out if the line to Woking was open. There he heard that the Chertsey line was also closed. He learned that several unusual telegrams had been received in the morning from Byfleet and Chertsey stations, but that these had suddenly stopped. My brother could get very little exact information out of them. 'There's fighting going on around Weybridge,' was all the information they had.
Quite a number of people who had been expecting friends to arrive by train were standing at the station. One man spoke to my brother.
'There are lots of people coming into Kingston in carts and things, with boxes and cases,' he said. 'They come from Weybridge and Walton, and they said guns have been heard at Chertsey, heavy firing, and that soldiers told them to move out at once because the Martians are corning. What does it all mean? The Martians can't get out of their pit, can they?'
My brother could not tell him.
At about five o'clock the growing crowd in the station was greatly excited by the opening of the line between the South-Eastern and South-Western stations, which is usually closed. Then trains carrying large guns and many soldiers passed through the station, moving towards Kingston. Soon after that the police arrived and began to move the crowd out of the station, and my brother went out into the street again.
On Waterloo Bridge a number of people were watching an odd brown liquid that came down the river from time to time. The sun was just setting and the Houses of Parliament stood against a peaceful sky. There was talk of a floating body.
In Wellington Street my brother met two men selling newspapers which had just been printed. The advertising boards said, 'Terrible tragedy! Fighting at Weybridge! Defeat of the Martians! London in danger!' He bought a paper.
Then, and only then, he understood something of the full power and terror of the Martians. He learned that they were not just a few small crawling creatures, but that they could control enormous mechanical bodies. They could move quickly and strike with such power that even the biggest guns could not stand against them. They were described as, 'great machines like spiders, nearly thirty metres high, as fast as an express train, and able to shoot out a beam of strong heat.'
Many field-guns, the report said, had been hidden around the country near Horsell Common, and especially between the Woking district and London. Five of the machines had been seen moving towards the Thames and one, by a lucky chance, had been destroyed. In other cases the shells had missed, and the guns had at once been destroyed by the Heat-Rays. Heavy losses of soldiers were mentioned, but in general the report was optimistic.
The Martians had been defeated, my brother read. They had gone back to their cylinders again, in the circle around Woking. Guns, including some very large ones, were moving in quickly. One hundred and sixteen were now in position, mainly covering London. There had never been such a large or fast movement of war equipment in England before.
No doubt, said the report, the situation was strange and serious, but the public was asked to avoid and discourage panic. No doubt the Martians were very frightening, but there could not be more than twenty of them against our millions.
All down Wellington Street people could be seen reading the paper. Men came running from buses to get copies. Certainly people were excited by the news, whatever they had felt before. A map shop in the Strand opened specially, and a man in his
Sunday clothes could be seen inside quickly fixing maps of Surrey to the shop window.
Going along the Strand to Trafalgar Square, my brother saw some of the refugees from West Surrey. There was a man with his wife and two boys and some pieces of furniture in a cart, and close behind him came another one with five or six well-dressed people and some boxes and cases. The faces of the people showed that they were very tired. Some distance behind them was a man on an old-fashioned bicycle. He was dirty and white-faced.
My brother turned towards Victoria station, and met a number of people like these. He had an idea that he might see me. He noticed an unusual number of police controlling the traffic. Some of the refugees were exchanging news with the people on the buses. Most were excited by their strange experience. My brother spoke to several of the refugees but none could give him any news of Woking, except one man who said that it had been totally destroyed the previous night.
At that time there was a strong feeling on the streets that the government should be blamed because they had not destroyed the Martians already.
At about eight o'clock the sound of tiring could be heard clearly ail over the south of London. My brother walked from Westminster to his room near Regent's Park. He was now very worried about me.
There were one or two carts with refugees going along Oxford Street, but the news was spreading so slowly that Regent Street and Portland Place were full of people taking their usual Sunday night walk. Along the edge of Regent's Park there were as many romantic couples as there had ever been. The night was warm and still. The sound of guns continued from time to time and after midnight there seemed to be lightning in the south.
My brother read and reread the paper, thinking that the worst had happened to me. He was restless, and after supper went out again. He returned and tried to concentrate on his examination notes, but without success. He went to bed a little after midnight and was woken in the early hours of Monday morning by the sound of knocking on doors, feet running in the street, distant drumming and the ringing of bells. For a moment he lay in surprise. Then he jumped out of bed and ran to the window.
Up and down the street other windows were opening and people were shouting questions. 'They are coming!' a policeman shouted back, banging on the door. 'The Martians are coming!' Then he hurried to the next door.
The sound of drums came from the army base in Albany Street and bells were ringing in every church. There was a noise of doors opening, and the lights went on in window after window in the houses across the street.
A closed carriage came up the street, quickly followed by a number of other fast-moving vehicles. Most of them were going to Chalk Farm station, where special trains were being loaded.
For a long time my brother stared out of the window in total surprise, watching the policeman banging at door after door. Then he crossed the room and began to dress, running with each piece of clothing to the window in order to miss nothing of the growing excitement. And then men selling unusually early newspapers came shouting into the street:
'London in danger! Kingston and Richmond defenses broken! Terrible killing in the Thames Valley!'
All around him - in the rooms below, in the houses on each side and across the road, and all across London - people were rubbing their eyes and opening windows to stare out and ask questions, and getting dressed quickly as the first breath of the coming storm of fear blew through the streets. It was the beginning of the great panic. London, which had gone to bed on Sunday night not knowing much and caring even less, was woken in the early hours of Monday morning to a real sense of danger.
Unable to learn what was happening from his window, my brother went down and out into the street, just as the sky turned pink with the dawn. Every moment brought more and more fast-moving people in vehicles.
'Black Smoke!' he heard people shouting. 'Black Smoke!' As he stood at the door, not knowing what to do, he saw another newspaper-seller approaching him. The man was running away with the others and selling his papers for many times their normal price as he ran - a strange mixture of profit and panic.
And from this paper my brother read that terrible report from the commander of the army:
The Martians are able to send out enormous clouds of black smoke. They have poisoned our gunners, destroyed Richmond, Kingston and Wimbledon, and are moving slowly towards London, destroying everything on the way, It is impossible to stop them. There is no safety from the Black Smoke except by running away.
That was all, but it was enough. All of the six million people who lived in the great city were beginning to move. Soon everybody would be trying to escape to the north. 'Black Smoke!' the voices shouted. 'Fire!'
The bells of the local church rang loudly, a carelessly-driven cart smashed, and people screamed and swore. Yellow lights moved around in the houses. And in the sky above them, the dawn was growing brighter - clear and calm.
He heard people running in the rooms, and up and down the stairs behind him. His neighbour came to the door. She was not properly dressed and her husband followed her, shouting.
As my brother began to realize how serious the situation was, he returned quickly to his room, put all the money he had - about ten pounds - into his pockets and went out again into the streets.
The Black Smoke
While the curate had sat and talked so wildly to me in the flat fields near Walton, and while my brother was watching the refugees pour across Westminster Bridge, the Martians had started to attack again. As it was reported later, most of them remained busy with preparations in the pit on Horsell Common until nine that night, doing something that produced a great amount of Black Smoke.
But three certainly came out at about eight o'clock. They moved forwards slowly and carefully towards Ripley and Weybridge, and so came in sight of the waiting guns. These Martians moved in a line, perhaps two kilometres apart. They communicated with each other by loud howls.
It was this howling and the firing of the guns at Ripley and Weybridge that we heard at Walton. The Ripley gunners had never been in action before. The guns fired one ineffective shell each, then the soldiers ran away. The Martian, without using his Heat-Ray, walked calmly over their guns.
The Weybridge men, however, were better led or were more experienced. Hidden by a wood, it seems they were not noticed by the Martian nearest to them. They aimed their guns well and fired at a distance of about one kilometer.
The shells exploded all round it and it was seen to move forwards a few steps, and go down. The guns were reloaded quickly. The fallen Martian used its voice, and immediately a second one answered it, appearing over the trees to the south. It seemed that one of its three legs had been broken. All of the second shells missed the Martian on the ground and, immediately.
The other Martians used their Heat-Rays on the guns. The shells blew up, the trees all around the guns caught fire and only one or two of the men escaped.
After this it seemed that the three Martians spoke together, and those who were watching them report that they stayed absolutely quiet for the next half-hour. The fallen Martian crawled slowly out of its machine and began to repair its leg. By about nine it had finished, and the machine was seen to move again.
A few minutes later these three were joined by four other Martians, each carrying a thick black tube. A similar tube was given to each of the three, and the seven spread out at equal distances along a curved line between Weybridge and Ripley.
A dozen signal lights went on as soon as they began to move, warning the waiting guns around Esher. At the same time four of the fighting-machines, also carrying tubes, crossed the river, and two of them, black against the western sky, came into sight of myself and the curate as we hurried along the road to the north.
When he saw them, the curate made a frightened noise and began running, but I knew it was no good running from a Martian and I crawled into some bushes by the side of the road. He looked back and turned to join me.
We heard the distant sound of a gun, then another nearer, and then another. And then the Martian closest to us raised his tube and fired it towards the guns, with a loud bang that made the ground shake. The other one did the same. There was no flash, no smoke, simply a loud noise.
I was so excited by all this that I completely forgot about my persona safety and raised my head out of the bushes. As I did, I heard another bang and something flew fast over my head. I expected at least to see smoke or fire, but there was only the deep-blue sky above and one single star. There had been no explosion, no answer from the guns. Silence returned, and three minutes passed.
'What's happened?' said the curate, standing up.
'I've no idea,' I answered.
I looked again at the Martian, and saw that it was now moving east along the river bank. Every moment I expected a hidden gun to fire at it, but the evening calm was unbroken. The figure of the Martian grew smaller as it moved away, and soon it was hidden by the mist and the coming night. The curate and I climbed higher up the hill and looked around. Towards Sunbury there was something dark, like a hill, hiding our view of the country further away. Then, far across the river, we saw another, similar hill. These hills grew lower and broader as we stared.
I had a sudden thought and looked to the north, and there I saw a third of these cloudy black hills.
Everything had become very still. Far away to the north-east we heard the Martians calling to each other, but our guns were silent.
At the time we could not understand these things, but later I learnt the meaning of these frightening black hills. Each of the Martians, standing in the great curve I have described, had used the tube he carried to fire a large cylinder over whatever hill, wood or other possible hiding-place for guns might be in front of him. Some fired only one of these, some two or more. These broke when they hit the ground - they did not explode - and let out an enormous amount of thick Black Smoke. This rose up in a cloud shaped like a hill, then sank and spread itself slowly over the surrounding country. And it was death to breathe that smoke.
It was heavy, this smoke, so when it began to sink down it behaved like a liquid, running down hills and into the valleys. And where it met with water, or even mist or wet grass, a chemical action took place and it turned into a powder that sank slowly and made room for more.
When the smoke had begun to settle, it stayed quite close to the ground so that even fifteen metres up in the air, on the roots and upper floors of houses and in high trees, there was a chance of escaping its poison. A man later told me that he had watched from a church roof as the smoke filled his village. For a day and a half he stayed up there, tired, hungry and burnt by the sun before it was safe to come down. But that was in a village where the Black Smoke was allowed to remain until it sank into the ground. Usually, when it had done its work, the Martian cleared the air by blowing steam at it.
They did this to the black clouds near us, as we saw in the starlight from the upper window of an empty house. From there we could see the searchlights on Richmond Hill and Kingston Hill moving in the sky, and at about eleven the windows shook, and we heard the sound of the large guns that had been put in position there. These continued for a quarter of an hour, firing blindly at Martians too far away to be seen. Then the fourth cylinder fell - a bright green star to the north-east.
So, doing it methodically, as a man might kill insects, the Martians spread this strange killing smoke over the country towards London. The ends of the curve slowly moved apart, until at least they formed a line about twelve kilometres long.
All through the night their tubes moved forwards. They never gave the guns any chance against them. Wherever there was a possibility of guns being hidden, they fired a cylinder of Black Smoke at them, and where the guns could be seen they used the Heat-Ray.
By midnight the burning trees along the slopes of Richmond Hill lit up clouds of Black Smoke which covered the whole valley of the Thames, and went as far as the eye could see.
They only used the Heat-Ray from time to time that night, either because they had a limited supply of material for its production or because they did not want to destroy the country, but only to defeat its people. They certainly succeeded. Sunday night was the end of organized opposition to their movement.
After that no group of men would stand against them, because this would mean almost certain death.
You have to imagine what happened to the gunners towards Esher, waiting so tensely in the evening light, because none of them lived to tell the story. You can see the quiet expectation, the officers watching, the gunners waiting with their horses, the groups of local people standing as near as they were allowed, the ambulances and hospital tents with the burnt and wounded from Weybridge. Then came the dull noise of the shots that the Martians fired, and the cylinder flying over the trees and houses and breaking in the neighboring fields.
You can imagine, too, how they watched as the blackness rose into the sky. The men and horses near it were seen running, screaming, falling down. There were shouts of fear, the guns suddenly left behind, men on the ground struggling to breathe, and the fast spreading of the dark smoke - a silent black cloud hiding its dead.
Before dawn the Black Smoke was pouring through the streets of Richmond. The government, already falling apart, made one last effort. It told the people of London that they had to run away.
Escape
You can understand the wave of fear that swept through the greatest city in the world at dawn on Monday morning. People ran to the railway stations, to the boats on the Thames, and hurried by even street that went north or east. By ten o'clock the police were finding it hard to keep control.
All the railway lines north of the Thames had been warned by midnight on Sunday, and trains were being filled. Passengers were fighting for standing room in the carriages even at two o'clock in the morning. By three the crowds were so large around the stations that people were being pushed over and walked on. Guns were fired and knives were used. The police who had been sent to direct the traffic, exhausted and angry, were fighting with the people they had been called out to protect.
And as time passed and the engine drivers and firemen refused to return to London, the people turned in growing crowds away from the stations and onto the roads running north. By midday a cloud of slowly sinking Black Smoke had moved along the Thames, cutting off all escape across the bridges. Another cloud came over Ealing, and surrounded a little island of people on Castle Hill, alive but unable to escape.
After trying unsuccessfully to get onto a train at Chalk Farm my brother came out into the road, pushed through the hurrying lines of vehicles, and had the luck to be at the front of a crowd which was taking bicycles from a shop. He got his hands on one. He put a hole in its front tire while he was pulling it through the broken window, and cut his wrist, but he managed to get away on it. The foot of Haverstock Hill was blocked by fallen horses, but my brother got onto the Belsize Road.
So he escaped from the worst of the panic in London and reached Edgware at about seven. A kilometer before the village the front wheel of the bicycle broke. He left it at the roadside and walked on. People there were standing on the pavement, looking in surprise at the growing crowds of refugees. He succeeded in getting some food at a pub.
My brother had some friends in Chelmsford, and this perhaps made him take the road that ran to the east. He saw few other refugees until he met the two ladies who later travelled with him. He arrived just in time to save them.
He heard their screams and, hurrying round the corner, saw a couple of men trying to pull them out of the little cart which they had been driving, while a third held onto the frightened horse's head. One of the ladies, a short woman dressed in white, was screaming. The other, younger one was hitting the man who held her arm with a whip.
My brother shouted and ran towards them. One of the men turned towards him. Realizing from his face that a fight was unavoidable, and being a good boxer, my brother hit him hard and knocked him back onto the wheel of the cart.
It was no time for fair fighting, and my brother quieted him with a kick, then took hold of the collar of the man who held the younger lady's arm. He heard the horse move forwards and then the third man hit him between the eyes. The man he held pulled himself free and ran off down the road in the direction from which he had come.
Still recovering, my brother found himself facing the man who had held the horse's head, and realized that the cart was moving away along the road. The man, who looked very well built, tried to move in closer, but my brother hit him in the face. Then, realizing that he was alone, he ran along the road after the cart, with the big man behind him. The man who had run away had now stopped and turned and was following my brother at a greater distance.
Suddenly, my brother fell. The big man tripped over him, and when my brother got to his feet he found himself facing both of them. He would have had very little chance if the younger lady had not very bravely stopped the cart and returned to help him. It seemed that she had had a gun all the time, but it had been under her seat when they were attacked. She fired from six metres away, narrowly missing my brother. The less brave of the two attackers ran away, and the other one followed cursing him. They both stopped further down the road, where the third man lay unconscious.
'Take this!' the younger lady said, and she gave my brother the gun.
'Let's go back to the cart,' said my brother, wiping the blood from his lip.
They walked to where the lady in white was struggling to hold the frightened horse. My brother looked back along the road. The robbers had had enough and were moving away.
'I'll sit here,' he said, 'if I may,' and he got up on the front seat. The younger lady sat beside him and made the horse move.
My brother learned that the two women were the wife and younger sister of a doctor living in Stanmore, The doctor had heard about the Martians at the railway station, on his way home from seeing a patient, and had sent them off, promising to follow after telling the neighbour. He said he would catch up with them by about half-past four in the morning, but it was now nearly nine and there was no sign of him.
They stopped and waited for a few hours, but the doctor did not appear. The younger woman suggested that they should move on and catch a train at St Albans. My brother, who had seen the situation at the stations in London, thought that was hopeless. He suggested that they should drive across Essex to the sea at Harwich, and from there get right out of the country.
Mrs Elphinstone - that was the name of the woman in white - refused to listen to his argument, and kept calling for 'George', but her sister-in-law was very quiet and sensible and agreed to my brother's suggestion. So, intending to cross the Great North Road, they went on towards Barnet. As they got closer they saw- more and more people, all tired and dirty. They also noticed a long line of dust rising among the houses in front of them. There was a sharp bend in the road, less than fifty metres from the crossroads. When they came out of it Mrs Elphinstone said. 'Good heavens! What is this you are driving us into'"
My brother stopped the horse.
The main road was a boiling stream of people, a river of human beings rushing to the north. A great cloud of dust, white under the strong sun, made everything within five metres of the ground grey and unclear. More dust was raised all the time by the thick crowd of men and women, horses and vehicles.
'Go on! Go on!' the voices said. 'They're coming.'
It seemed that the whole population of London was moving north. There were people of every class and profession, but they were all dusty; their skins were dry, their lips black and cracked, and all of them looked very afraid.
My brother saw Miss Elphinstone covering her eyes.
'Let's go back!' he shouted. 'We cannot cross this.'
They went back a hundred metres in the direction they had come. As they passed the bend in the road, my brother saw a man lying not far away. His face was white and shining. It was clear that he was near death. The two women sat in silence.
Beyond the bend my brother changed his mind. He turned to Miss Elphinstone. 'We must go that way,' he said, and turned the horse round again.
For the second time that day the girl showed her courage. My brother went into the crowd and stopped a horse pulling a cart, while she drove in front of it. In another moment they were caught and swept forwards with the stream of vehicles. My brother, with red whip-marks on his face and hands from the car's driver, got up into the driving seat.
'Point the gun at the man behind,' he said, giving it to her, 'it he pushes us too hard. No - point it at his horse.'
Then they began to look for a chance of getting to the right side of the road. But as soon as they were in the stream of vehicles, there was little they could do. They were taken through Barnet and were more than a kilometer beyond the centre of the town before they could fight their way across to the other side of the road.
They turned to the east and climbed a hill. There they stopped for the rest of the afternoon, because they were all exhausted.
They were beginning to feel very hungry and the night was cold. In the evening many people came hurrying along the road near their stopping-place, escaping from unknown dangers and going in the direction from which my brother had come.
The Thunder Child
If the Martians had only wanted destruction, they could have killed the whole population of London on Monday, as it moved out slowly through the neighboring countryside. It one had flown over London that morning, every road to the north or east would have seemed black with moving refugees, everyone a frightened and exhausted human being.
None of the wars of history had such an effect - six million people, moving without weapons or food or any real sense of direction. It was the start of the death of the human race.
And over the blue hills to the south of the river, the Martians moved backwards and forwards, calmly spreading their poison clouds over one piece of country and then over another. They destroyed any weapons they found and wrecked the railways here and there. They seemed in no hurry, and did not go beyond the central part of London all that day. It is possible that many people stayed in their houses through Monday morning. It is certain that many died at home, killed by the Black Smoke.
Until about midday there were still many ships on the Thames, attracted by the enormous sums of money offered by refugees. It is said that many who swam out to these ships were pushed away and drowned. At about one o'clock in the afternoon, the thin remains of a cloud of Black Smoke was seen coming through London's Blackfriars Bridge. This caused a terrible panic and all the ships and boats tried to leave at the same time. Many became stuck together under Tower Bridge, and the sailors had to fight against people who tried to get on from the riverside. People were actually climbing down onto the boats from the bridge above.
When, an hour later, a Martian walked down the river, there was nothing but broken pieces of boats in the water.
I will tell you later about the falling of the fifth cylinder. The sixth one fell in Wimbledon. My brother, watching beside the women in the cart in the field, saw the green flash of it far beyond the hills. On Tuesday the three of them, still intending to get out to sea, drove through the busy country towards Colchester.
That day the refugees began to realize how much they needed food. As they grew hungry, they began to steal. Farmers defended their animals and crops with guns in their hands. A number of people now, like my brother, were moving to the east, and some were even so desperate that they turned back towards London to get food. These were mainly people from the northern suburbs who had only heard of, but not seen, the Black Smoke.
My brother heard that about half the members of the government had met in Birmingham, in central England, and that enormous amounts of explosive were being prepared to be used in the Midlands. He was told that the Midland Railway Company had started running trains again, and was taking people north from St Albans. There was also a notice which said that within twenty-four hours bread would be given to the hungry people. But this did not change their plans, and they continued travelling east. They heard no more about the bread than this notice, and nobody else did either.
That night the seventh cylinder fell in London, on Primrose Hill.
On Wednesday my brother and the two women reached Chelmsford, and there a number of people, calling themselves the Council of Public Safety, took their horse for food. Although the three of them were hungry themselves, they decided to walk on.
After several more hours on the road, they suddenly saw the sea and the most amazing crowd of ships of all types that it is possible to imagine.
After the sailors could no longer come up the Thames, they went to the towns on the Essex coast to take people onto their ships. Close to the shore was a large number of fishing-boats from various countries, and steamboats from the Thames. Beyond these were the larger ships - a great number of coal ships, ships carrying goods, and neat white and grey passenger ships from Southampton and Hamburg.
About three kilometres out there was a warship. This was the Thunder Child, the only one in sight, but far away to the right a column of smoke marked the position of other warships. These waited in a long line, ready for action, right across the mouth of the Thames, watching the Martian attack but powerless to prevent it.
At the sight of the sea Mrs Elphmstone panicked. She had never been out of England before; she would rather die than be friendless in a foreign country. She had been growing increasingly upset and depressed during the two days' journey. Her great idea was to return to Stanmore. Things had always been safe in Stanmore. They would find George in Stanmore.
It was very difficult to get her down to the beach, where after some time my brother caught the attention of some men from a steamboat. They sent a small boat and agreed on a price of thirty-six pounds for the three passengers. The steamboat was going, these men said, to the Belgian port of Ostend.
It was about two o'clock when my brother got onto it with the two women. There was food available, although the prices were very high, and the three of them had a meal.
There were already around forty passengers on the boat, some of whom had spent their last money getting a ticket, but the captain stayed until five in the afternoon, picking up passengers until the boat was dangerously crowded. He would probably have stayed longer it the sound or guns had not begun at about that time in the south. The Thunder Child, too, fired a small gun and sent up a string of flags. Some smoke rose as its engines started. At the same time, far away in the south-east, the shapes of three warships appeared, beneath clouds of smoke.
The little steamboat was already moving out to sea, when a Martian appeared, small and far away, moving along the muddy coast from the south. The captain swore at the top of his voice at his own delay, and the ship increased speed.
It was the first Martian that my brother had seen, and he stood, more amazed than frightened, as it moved steadily towards the ships, walking further and further into the water. Then, far away, another appeared, stepping over some small trees, and then another could be seen even further away, crossing the flat mud that lay between the sea and the sky.
Looking to the north-east, my brother saw the long line of ships already moving away from the approaching terror. One ship was passing behind another; many were turning. Steamships whistled and sent up clouds of steam, sails were let out and small boats rushed here and there. He was so interested in this that he did not look out to sea. And then a quick movement of the steamboat (which had turned to avoid being hit) threw him off the seat on which he had been standing. There was shouting all around him. a movement of feet and a cheer that seemed to be answered.
He got to his feet and saw to the right, less than a hundred metres away, the warship cutting through the water at full speed, throwing enormous waves out on either side.
Some water came over the side of the steamboat and blinded my brother for a moment. When his eyes were clear again, the warship had passed and was rushing towards the land. He looked past it at the Martians again and saw the three of them now close together, and standing so far out to sea that their legs were almost completely under water.
It seemed to him that they were surprised by this new enemy. To their minds, perhaps, no other machine could be as large as themselves. The Thunder Child fired no gun, but simply sailed at full speed towards them. Probably because it did not fire, it managed to get quite close. They did not know what it was. If the ship had fired one shell, they would have sent it straight to the bottom with the Heat-Ray.
Suddenly, the nearest Martian lowered his tube and fired a cylinder at the Thunder Child. This hit its left side and sent up a black cloud that the ship moved away from. To the watchers on the steamboat, low in the water and with the sun in their eyes, it seemed that the warship was already among the Martians.
They saw the three thin figures separating and rising out of the water as they moved back towards the shore, and one of them raised the box that fired his Heat-Ray. He held it pointing down, and a cloud of steam came up from the water as it hit the ship.
A flame rose up through the steam and then the Martian began to fall over. In another moment it had hit the sea, and a great amount of water and steam flew high in the air. The guns of the Thunder Child were heard going off one after another, and one shot hit the water close by the steamboat.
No one worried about that very much. As the Martian fell, the captain shouted and all the crowded passengers at the back of the steamer joined in. And then he shouted again. Because rushing out beyond the smoke and steam came something long and black with flames coming from it.
The warship could stilt turn and its engines worked. It went straight towards a second Martian, and was within a hundred metres of it when the Heat-Rav hit it. There was a violent bang, a blinding flash and the warship blew up. The Martian was thrown back by the violence of the explosion, and in another moment the burning wreckage, still moving forwards, had broken the Martian like something made of wood. My brother shouted. A boiling cloud of steam hid everything again.
'Two!' shouted the captain.
Everyone was shouting and they could hear shouts and cheers from the other ships and the boats. The steam stayed in the air for many minutes, hiding the third Martian and the coast. All this time the steamboat was moving steadily out to sea and away from the fight, and when at last the steam cleared, the black cloud got in the way and they could see nothing of either the Thunder Child or the third Martian. But the other warships were now quite close and moving in towards the shore.
The little ship my brother was on continued to move out to sea, and the warships became smaller in the distance.
Then suddenly, out of the golden sunset, came the sound of guns and the sight of black shadows moving. Everyone moved to the side of the steamboat and looked to the west, but smoke rose and blocked the sun. Nothing could be seen clearly. The ship travelled on while the passengers wondered.
The sun sank into grey clouds, the sky darkened and an evening star came into sight. Then the captain cried out and pointed. Something rushed up into the sky, something flat and broad and very large, and flew in a great curve. It grew smaller, sank slowly and disappeared again into the night. And as it flew, it rained down darkness on the land.
Earth Under the Martians
In the last two chapters I have moved away from my own adventures to tell of the experiences of my brother. All through this time I and the curate had been hiding in the empty house where we went to escape the Black Smoke. We stayed there all Sunday night and all the next day - the day of the panic - in a little island of daylight, cut off by the Black Smoke from the rest of the world. We could only wait and be bored during those two days.
I was very worried about my wife. I thought of her in Leatherhead, frightened, in danger, thinking of me already as a dead man. I knew my cousin was brave enough for any emergency, but he was not the sort of man to understand danger quickly and do something about it. These worries stayed on my mind and I grew very tired of the curate's constant talking. After trying and failing to keep him quiet, I kept away from him in other rooms in the house.
We were surrounded by the Black Smoke all that day and the following morning. There were signs of people in the next house on Sunday evening - a face at a window and moving lights, and later the closing of a door. But I do not know who these people were or what happened to them. We saw nothing of them the next day. The Black Smoke moved slowly towards the river all through Monday morning, slowly getting nearer and nearer to us, coming at last along the road outside the house that hid us.
A Martian walked across the fields at about midday, killing the stuff with steam. When we looked out I saw the country covered with black dust, but we were no longer trapped. As soon as I saw that escape was possible, my dream of action returned. But the curate did not want to leave.
'We are safe here - safe here,' he repeated.
I decided to leave him. The soldier had taught me well and I looked for food and drink and a spare shirt to take with me. When it was clear to the curate that I intended to go alone, he suddenly decided to come. Everything was quiet through the afternoon and we started at about five o'clock along the blackened road to Sunbury.
Here and there along the road, and in Sunbury itself, were dead bodies of horses as well as men, turned-over carts and luggage, all covered thickly with black dust. As we passed other small towns, we found them unaffected by either Heat-Ray or Black Smoke, and there were some people alive, although none could give us news. Here too, there were signs of quick departure. I remember a pile of three broken bicycles, flattened by the wheels of passing carts. We crossed Richmond Bridge at about half-past eight. Once again, on the Surrey side, there was black dust that had once been smoke, and some dead bodies - a number of them near the approach to the station.
Then suddenly, as we walked north, we saw some people running. The top of a Martian fighting-machine came into sight over the house tops, less than a hundred metres away from us. We stood shocked by our danger, and if the Martian had been looking down we would have died immediately. We were too frightened to go on and hid in a hut in a garden. There the curate lay down, crying silently and refusing to move again.
But my fixed idea of reaching Leatherhead would not let me rest, and in the evening I went out again. I left the curate in the hut, but he came hurrying after me.
That second start was the most foolish thing I ever did. It was obvious that the Martians were all around us. As soon as the curate caught up with me, we saw either the fighting-machine we had seen before or another one, far away across the fields. Four or five little black figures hurried in front of it, and in a moment it became obvious that this Martian was hunting them. In three steps it was among them, and they ran away in all directions. It did not use its Heat-Ray, but picked them up one by one and threw them into a large metal box which stuck out behind it.
For the first time, I realized that perhaps the Martians had another purpose, apart from destroying human beings. We stood for a moment in terror, then ran through a gate behind us into a garden and hid in a corner until the stars were out.
It was nearly eleven o'clock before we felt brave enough to go out again. We kept away from the road, moving through gardens and some areas full of trees. When we got to Sheen, the curate said that he felt unwell and we decided to try one of the houses.
The one we chose was in a walled garden, and in the kitchen we found some food. There were two loaves of bread, a raw steak and some cooked meat. Under a shelf we found some bottled beer, and there were two bags of green beans and some lettuce. In a cupboard there was some tinned soup and fish and two tins of cake. I am listing these exactly because we lived on this food for the next fortnight.
We sat in the kitchen in the dark and had a meal of cold food, and just before midnight there was a blinding flash of green light followed by the loudest bang I have ever heard. There was a crash of glass, the sound of falling walls, and then the ceiling fell down in pieces on our heads. I was knocked across the floor and my head hit the oven. I lay there unconscious for a long time, the curate told me, and when I woke up he was wiping my face with a wet handkerchief.
For some time I could not remember what had happened.
'Are you better?' he asked.
At last I answered him. I sat up.
'Don't move,' he said. 'The floor is covered with broken plates. You can't possibly move without making a noise, and I think they are outside.'
We both sat in complete silence, so we could hardly hear each other breathing. Outside and very near was the noise from a machine, which started and stopped.
'What is it?' I asked.
'A Martian!' said the curate.
Our situation was so strange and unbelievable that for three or four hours, until the dawn came, we hardly moved. And then the light came, not through the window, which was filled with earth from the garden, but through a small hole that had been knocked in the wall. Through this we saw the body of a Martian, watching a cylinder which was still red with heat. When we saw that, we moved as slowly as possible out of the grey light of the kitchen and into the darkness of the hall.
Suddenly, the truth came to me.
'The fifth cylinder!' I whispered. 'It's hit this house and buried us under the ruins!'
For a time the curate was silent, then he said, 'God help us!'
For hours we lay there in the darkness, while from outside came the sounds of hammering and then, after some time, a sound like an engine. Towards the end of the day I found that I was very hungry. I told the curate that I was going to look for food, and moved back into the kitchen again. He did not answer, but as soon as I began eating I heard him crawling towards me.
After eating we went back to the hall, and I fell asleep. When I woke up and looked around I was alone. I crawled back into the kitchen and saw him lying down and looking out of the hole at the Martians.
The noises still continued. Through the hole I could see the top of a tree, turned to gold by the evening sun. I stepped carefully through the broken plates that covered the floor.
I touched the curate's leg, and he moved so suddenly that some bricks slid down outside with a loud crash. I took hold of his arm, afraid that he might cry out, and for a long time we remained still. Then I raised my head cautiously to see what had happened. The falling bricks had left another hole in the wall of the building. Through this I was able to see into what had been, only the previous night, a quiet road. Things had changed greatly.
The fifth cylinder had not fallen on our house, but on top of the house next door. The building had completely disappeared. The cylinder had gone right through it and made a large hole in the ground, much larger than the pit I had looked into in Woking. The earth all around had been thrown up over the neighbouring houses. Our house had fallen backwards. The front part of it had been destroyed completely. By chance the kitchen had escaped and now stood buried under earth and bricks, covered on every side except towards the cylinder. We now lay on the very edge of the enormous round pit that the Martians were making.
The cylinder was already open in the centre of the pit, and on the furthest side one of the great fighting-machines, empty now, stood tall and unmoving against the evening sky. However, at first I hardly noticed the pit and the cylinder, because of the strange shining machine that I saw working there, and the odd creatures that were crawling slowly and painfully across the earth near it.
This machine was shaped like a spider with five legs and a great number of tentacles. With these it was taking pieces of metal out of the cylinder and laying them on the earth behind it. It was doing this so quickly and perfectly that I did not see it as a machine at first. The fighting-machines were extraordinary, but could not compare to this building-machine. People who have never seen these things can hardly understand how alive they looked.
I had seen the Martians themselves once before, but only for a short time, and then the sight had almost made me sick. Now I was more used to them, and was in a good position with a lot of time to study them properly. They were the strangest creatures it is possible to imagine. They had large, round bodies - or perhaps heads - about a metre and a half across. Each body had a face in front of it. This face had no nose - I do not think they had any sense of smell - but it had a pair of very large, dark eyes, and just beneath these a kind of v-shaped mouth. In the back of the head, or body - I do not really know what to call it - there was a flat surface like the skin of a drum, which we now know worked as an ear. Around the mouth were sixteen thin, whip-like tentacles, arranged in two groups of eight. These worked like hands.
As I watched the Martians, they seemed to be trying to raise themselves on the hands, but with their increased weight on Earth this was impossible. It may be that on Mars they moved around on them quite easily.
Most of the space inside their bodies was taken by the brain. Besides this they had a heart, but they had no stomach because they did not eat. Instead, they took fresh blood from living creatures and used a tube to put it straight into their own bodies. This idea seems horrible to us, but at the same time I think we should remember how disgusting our meat-eating habits would seem to an intelligent rabbit.
In three other ways their bodies were different from ours. They did not sleep, and because they had very simple bodies they never seemed to get tired. On Earth they could not move without effort, but even at the end of their time here they remained active. In twenty-four hours they did twenty-four hours of work.
Also, strange as it may seem, the Martians were absolutely without sex. A young Martian, we now know, was born on Earth during the war, and it was found growing out of the body of its parent, just like some young plants.
A final difference seems very unimportant. Germs, which cause so much disease and pain on Earth, have either never appeared on Mars or they got rid of them a long time ago.
It is generally supposed that the Martians communicated by sounds and by moving their arms. But no human being saw as much of them as I did and lived to tell the story, and I can say that I have seen four, five or six of them slowly performing the most difficult work without sound or any other signal. I know a little of psychology and I am absolutely certain that they exchanged thoughts.
While I was still watching their slow movements in the sunlight, the curate pulled violently at my arm. I turned and saw an unhappy face and silent, moving lips. He wanted to see what was happening. The hole was only big enough for one of us to look through, so I had to stop watching them for a time while he had his chance.
When I looked again, the busy building-machine had already put together several of the pieces of metal from inside the cylinder into a shape that was very like its own. Down on the left a busy little digging-machine could be seen, sending out small clouds of green smoke and working its way round the pit, making it bigger and piling the earth up over the top. This was what had caused the regular heating noise. It whistled as it worked, and no Martian seemed to be controlling it.
In the Ruined House
The arrival of a second fighting-machine made us move back out of the kitchen into the hall, because we were afraid that from that height the Martian might see us through the hole. At a later date we began to feel less in danger of being seen because the sunlight outside was very bright, but at first anything approaching the house drove us back into the hall in fear. However, despite the danger, we could not prevent ourselves from going back to look again and again. In our desire to watch, we even fought each other within a few centimeters of being seen.
We were very different people with different habits of thought and action, and those differences increased because we were living together in this dangerous place. The curate talked endlessly, and this prevented me from forming a plan of action.
He had no self-control at all and sometimes cried for hours at a time. He ate more than I did, and did not seem to understand that we had to stay in the house until the Martians had finished their work if we wanted to stay alive. I tried threatening him, and in the end I hit him. That worked for some time.
The curate was watching through the hole when the first men were brought there. I was sitting near him, listening hard. He made a sudden movement backwards and for a moment I shared his panic. Then curiosity gave me courage and I got up, stepped across him and went to the hole.
At first I could see no reason for his behaviour. The night was coming but the Martians had lights on their machines. The whole scene was one of moving lights and shadows, difficult for the eyes. The Martians at the bottom of the pit could no longer be seen, because the earth around it was now so high. A fighting- machine stood in the corner of the pit. Then, through the noise of the machinery, came the faint sound of human voices.
I watched the fighting-machine closely, sure for the first time that it did actually contain a Martian. I could see the oily shine of its skin and the brightness of its eyes. And suddenly I heard a shout and saw a long tentacle reaching over the shoulder of the machine to the little cage on its back. Then something - something struggling violently - was lifted high against the sky and brought down again. I saw that it was a man. He was fat, red- faced, middle-aged, well-dressed; perhaps earlier he had been important. He disappeared behind the pile of earth and for a moment there was silence. Then we heard him scream and the sound of long and cheerful calling from the Martians.
I moved away from the hole, put my hands over my ears and ran into the hall. The curate, who had been lying silently with his arms over his head, looked up as I passed, cried out quite loudly and came running after me.
That night, as we hid in the hall, I felt a great need to do something but could think of no plan of escape. But afterwards, during the second day, I was able to consider our position clearly. The curate, I found, was quite unable to discuss anything. The death of the man outside had taken away all his powers of thought. He had almost sunk to the level of an animal. I began to think that, although our position was terrible, there was no reason yet to give up hope. The Martians might only stay in this pit for a short time, then move on. Or if they stayed permanently, they might not think it necessary to watch it all the time.
On the third day, if I remember correctly, I saw a boy killed. It was the only occasion on which I actually saw the Martians feed. After that I avoided the hole in the wall for most of a day.
The Martians had made such an impression on me that at first I did not think I could escape. I did not think that they could be defeated by human beings. But on the fourth or fifth night I heard a sound like heavy guns.
It was very late and the moon was shining brightly. The Martians had taken away the digging-machine and apart from the fighting-machine on the far side of the pit and a building- machine that was busy out of my sight, the pit was empty. I heard a dog, and that familiar sound made me listen. Then I heard a noise exactly like the sound of big guns. I heard six bangs and then six more. And that was all.
On the sixth day of our imprisonment I looked out for the last time, and I soon found myself alone. Instead of staying close and trying to move me away from the pit, the curate had gone back into the hall. I followed him quickly and quietly and in the darkness I heard him drinking. I put my hand out and my fingers closed around a bottle of wine.
For a few minutes we fought together. The bottle hit the floor and broke, and I stopped fighting and got up. We stood breathing heavily, staring at each other. In the end I moved between him and the food and told him that I was going to take control.
I divided the food in the cupboard into separate amounts to last us ten days. I would not let him eat any more that day. In the afternoon he tried to get some food. I had been asleep but in a moment I was awake. All day and all night we sat face to face. I was tired but would not give up, and he cried and complained about his immediate hunger. The rest of the time he just talked to himself, and I began to realize that he had gone completely mad.
Through the eighth and ninth days his voice grew louder. He threatened me, begged me, and this was mixed with a great deal of talk about his service to God. Then he slept for some time and began again with even more strength, so loudly that I had to try to stop him.
'Be still!' I demanded.
He rose to his knees. 'I have been still too long,' he said, loud enough for the Martians to hear, 'and now I must tell the world. This place will be destroyed because of the bad things we have done!'
'Shut up!' I said, getting to my feet. 'Please -'
'No!' he shouted, at the top of his voice. 'Speak! The word of God is with me!'
In three steps he was at the door leading to the kitchen.
I went after him, picking up the coal-hammer as I entered the room. Before he was half-way across the floor, I was right behind him. I swung the hammer and hit him on the back of the head. He fell forwards and lay flat on the floor. I stepped over him and stood there breathing hard. He did not move.
Suddenly, I heard a noise outside and the hole in the wall became dark. I looked up and saw the lower part of a building- machine coming slowly across it. Then, through a sort of glass plate, I saw the large, dark eyes of a Martian, and one of its tentacles appeared, moving in through the hole.
I turned, tripped over the curate and stopped at the hall door. The tentacle was now two metres or more into the room, moving backwards and forwards with strange, sudden movements. I forced myself back into the hall. I shook violently and could hardly stand straight. Had the Martian seen me? What was it doing now?
Then I heard the sound of a heavy body - I knew whose it was - being dragged across the floor of the kitchen towards the opening. I could not stop myself - I moved to the door and looked back into the kitchen. In the light from outside, I saw the Martian studying the curate's head. I thought at once that it would know that I was there from the mark of the hammer.
I shut the door and moved back into the hall and tried to hide myself in the corner. Then I heard a faint metallic sound as the tentacle moved back across the kitchen floor. I thought that it might not be long enough to reach me. I prayed. Then I heard it touching the handle. It had found the door. The Martians understood doors!
It moved the handle up and down for a moment, and then the door opened.
In the darkness I could just see the thing moving towards me and examining the wall and the floor. It was like a black snake moving its head from side to side.
Once, even, it touched my boot. I almost screamed, but I bit my hand. For a time it did not move, then it moved back through the door.
I heard it go into the food cupboard, It moved the tins and a bottle broke. Then there was silence.
Had it gone?
At last I decided that it had.
The tentacle did not come into the hall again, but I lay all the tenth day in the darkness, too frightened even to move for a drink. I did not enter the kitchen again for two days. When at last I did, I found that the food cupboard was now empty. The Martians had taken everything. On that day and the next I had no food and nothing to drink.
On the twelfth day my thirst was so bad that I went into the kitchen and used the noisy rainwater pump that stood by the sink. I managed to get a couple of glasses of dirty water. This made me feel a lot better, and the noise of the pump did not bring a tentacle in through the opening.
On the thirteenth day I drank some more water, and thought of impossible plans of escape. Whenever I slept, I dreamed either of the death of the curate or of wonderful dinners.
Then, early on the fifteenth day, I heard the sound of a dog outside. This greatly surprised me. I went into the kitchen and saw its head looking in through the hole.
I thought that if I could attract it in quietly, I would be able, perhaps, to kill and eat it. It would be a good idea to kill it anyway, in case its actions attracted the attention of the Martians.
I moved forwards, saying, 'Good dog!' very softly, but it suddenly pulled his head back and disappeared.
I listened. I heard the sound of some birds but that was all.
For a long time I lay close to the opening until, encouraged by the silence, I looked out.
Except in the corner, where a number of birds fought over some dead bodies, there was not a living thing in the pit.
I stared around, hardly believing my eyes. All the machinery had gone. Slowly I made the opening larger and pushed myself through it. I could see in every direction except behind me and there were no Martians in sight.
I hesitated, then with a rush of desperate courage, and with my heart beating violently, I climbed to the top of the pile of earth in which I had been buried.
When I had last seen this part of Sheen, it had been a street of comfortable white and red houses. Now the neighboring ones had all been destroyed. Far away I saw a thin cat walking along a wall, but there was no sign of people.
After my time in the darkness, the day seemed very bright, the sky was shining blue. A gentle wind moved the flowers. And oh! The sweetness of the air.
For some time I stood there, not worrying about my safety. At that moment, I felt the beginning of something that soon grew quite clear in my mind, that worried me for many days. I was not the master now, but an animal among the animals, under the power of the Martians. The rule of man had ended.
But as soon as this feeling came, it left me, and my main problem became hunger. I climbed a wall and fell into a neighboring garden. Here I found some young vegetables, which I took. Then I started walking towards the river. There were two ideas in my mind - to get more food and to move, as quickly as possible, away from the pit.
When I reached the Thames, I drank as much water as I could. I then walked up a hill to Putney Common.
Here I moved through areas which had been totally destroyed and others which were totally undamaged; houses with their curtains and their doors closed. I went into a couple of the houses, looking for food, but all of it had already been taken. I lay for the rest of the day in a garden, too exhausted to go on.
All this time I saw no human beings and no signs of the Martians. I saw a couple of hungry-looking dogs, but they hurried away from me. I also saw some human bones, with all the flesh eaten off. After sunset I struggled on along the road towards Putney, and in a garden I found some potatoes, enough to stop my hunger. From there I looked down on Putney and the river.
The view of blackened trees and empty ruined buildings made me very unhappy. And over all - silence. It filled me with terror to think how quickly that great change had come. Near the top of Putney Hill I came across more human bones, eaten clean and left lying around. The Martians, it seemed, had killed and eaten everyone around there, except for a few lucky ones like myself. They were now looking for food somewhere else. Perhaps even now they were destroying Berlin or Paris, or maybe they were moving north.
The Man on Putney Hill
I spent that night in the pub that stands on the top of Putney Hill, sleeping in a made bed for the first time since I had run away to Leatherhead. I broke into the house - and afterwards found that the front door was unlocked. I searched every room for food until, when I was ready to give up, I found some bread and two tins of fruit in one of the bedrooms. The place had already been searched and emptied. Later, in the bar, I found some sandwiches that no one had noticed. I ate some of these and put the rest in my pockets.
I lit no lamps, afraid that a Martian might come through that part of London looking for food in the night. Before I went to bed I was very restless and went from window to window, looking out for some sign of them. I slept little. As I lay in bed, I found myself thinking of the killing of the curate.
I had no regrets about this, but in the stillness of the night, with a sense that God was near, I thought again of every part of our conversation from the time we had first met. We had been unable to co-operate. If I had known, I would have left him at Walton, but I had not been able to see ahead. Nobody saw me kill him, but I have described it here and the reader can make a judgement.
The morning was bright and fine and there were little golden clouds in the eastern sky. In the road that runs from the top of Putney Hill to Wimbledon many things had been left behind by the crowds that ran towards London on the Sunday night after the fighting began. There was a little two-wheeled cart with a broken wheel. It had the name of a shop written on it. There was a hat lying in the mud, and a lot of broken glass with blood on it.
I moved slowly because I was very tired and my plans were uncertain. I had an idea of going to Leatherhead, although I knew there was little chance of finding my wife there. Certainly, unless they had been killed, she and my cousins would have run away.
I came to the edge of Wimbledon Common and stood there, under cover of some trees and bushes. It stretched far and wide and I hesitated on the edge of that large open space. Soon I had an odd feeling of being watched and, turning suddenly, I saw something hiding in some of the bushes. I took a step towards it, and it rose up and became a man armed with a sword. I approached him slowly. He stood silently, watching me but not moving.
As I came nearer, I saw that he was dressed in clothes as dusty and dirty as my own. His black hair fell over his eyes, and his face was dark and dirty and thin, so at first I did not recognize him.
'Stop!' he cried, when I was within ten metres of him, and I stopped. 'Where have you come from?' he said.
I thought, watching him.
'I have come from Sheen,' I said. 'I was buried near the pit the Martians made around their cylinder. I have escaped.'
'There is no food around here,' he said. 'This is my country: all this hill down to the river and up to the edge of the common. There is only food for one. Which way are you going?'
'I don't know,' I said.
He looked at me uncertainly, then his expression suddenly changed. He pointed at me.
'It's you,' he said,'- the man from Woking. And you weren't killed at Weybridge?'
I recognized him at the same moment.
'You're the soldier who came into my garden.'
'What luck!' he said. 'We are lucky ones!'
He put out a hand and I took it.
'I hid,' he said. 'But they didn't kill everyone. And after they went away, I went towards Walton across the fields. But - it's only been sixteen days and your hair is grey.' He looked over his shoulder suddenly. 'Only a bird,' he said. 'This is a bit open. Let's crawl under those bushes and talk.'
'Have you seen any Martians?' I asked. 'Since I got out-'
'They've gone away across London,' he said. 'I guess they've got a bigger camp there. The night before last I saw some lights up in the air. I believe they've built a flying-machine and are learning to fly'
I stopped, on hands and knees, because we had come to the bushes.
'Fly!'
'Yes,' he said, 'fly!'
I crawled into an open space in the bushes and sat down.
'If they manage to do that, we haven't got a chance,' I said. 'They will simply go round the world.'
'They will. But it will make things easier around here. And besides ...' he looked at me. 'Don't you believe that we're beaten? I do.'
I stared. Strange as it may seem, I had not thought of things this way, although it was perfectly obvious. I had still held onto some hope.
'It's finished,' he said. 'They've lost one - just one. And they've taken over the capital of the most powerful country in the world. The death of that one at Weybridge was an accident. And these are only the first ones. They keep coming. These green stars - I've seen none for five or six days, but I've no doubt they're falling somewhere every night. There's nothing we can do. We're beaten!'
I did not answer. I sat staring in front of me, trying without success to find a way of arguing against him. Suddenly, I remembered the night I had watched through the telescope.
'After the tenth shot they fired no more - at least until the first cylinder came.'
'How do you know?' said the soldier. I explained. 'Something wrong with the gun?' he said. 'But even if there is, they'll get it right again.'
We sat looking at each other.
'And what will they do with us?' I said.
'That's what I've been thinking.' he said. 'It seems to me that at the moment they catch us when they want food. But they won't keep doing that. As soon as they've destroyed all our guns and ships and railways, they'll begin to catch us one by one, picking the best and keeping us in cages and things. They haven't begun on us yet. Don't you see that?'
'Not begun!' I cried.
'Not begun. And instead of rushing around blindly, we've got to change to suit the new situation. That's how I see it.'
'But if that's true,' I said, 'what is there to live for?'
'There won't be anything important for a million years or more - no music, no art and no nice little visits to restaurants. No entertainment. But men like me are going to go on living - so human beings can continue. And if I'm not mistaken, you'll show how strong you are too. We aren't going to be killed. And I don't intend to be caught, either, and caged and fattened. Ugh!'
'You don't mean -'
'I do. I'm going on. Under their feet. I've thought about it. We've got to learn while we've got a chance. And we've got to live and stay independent while we learn. That's what has to be done.'
I stared, surprised and greatly affected by the man's courage.
'Good God!' I said. 'You are a brave man.' And suddenly I held his hand. 'Go on,' I said.
'Well, people who intend to escape them must get ready. I'm getting ready. But not all of us can live like animals, and that's how we'll have to live. That's why I watched you. I had my doubts. You're thinner. I didn't know that it was you, you see. All these - the sort of people that lived in these houses, all those little office workers that used to live down that way - they'd be no good. They haven't any spirit in them - no proud dreams and no great ideas. They just used to rush off to work - I've seen hundreds of them, with a bit of breakfast in their hand, running to catch their train, frightened they'd be sacked if they didn't. Well, the Martians will be a good thing for them. Nice big cages, fattening food, no worry. After a week or two running around the fields on empty stomachs they'll come and be caught quite happily.' He paused. 'The Martians will probably make pets of some of them; train them to do tricks - who knows? And some, maybe, they will train to hunt us.'
'No,' I cried, 'that's impossible! No human being -'
'What's the good of going on with such lies?' said the soldier. 'There are men who would do it cheerfully. What nonsense to pretend there aren't!'
And I realized that I agreed with him.
I sat and thought about these things. It was interesting that he, an ordinary soldier, seemed to have a much better understanding of the situation than I, a professional writer.
'What plans do you have?' I said.
He hesitated.
'Well, we have to invent a life where people can live and have children, and be safe enough to bring the children up. Yes - wait a bit, and I'll make it clearer what I think ought to be done. The ones the Martians capture will be like farm animals; in a few years they'll be big, beautiful, stupid - rubbish. But we who stay free risk turning into wild animals.
'You see, I intend to live underground. I've been thinking about the drains. Under London there are hundreds of kilometres of them. And we can dig passages between the drains and buildings. And then there are the railways, where they go underground. You begin to see? And we'll get some people together - strong, clean-minded men. We're not going to accept any rubbish that comes in. Weak ones go out again.'
'As you intended me to go?'
'Well - I discussed it, didn't I?
'We won't argue about that. Go on.'
'The people who stay will obey orders. We want strong, good women too - mothers and teachers. No lazy ones with rolling eyes. We can't have any weak or silly ones. Life is real again, and the useless and bad ones have to die. They ought to die. They ought to be willing to die. It would be wrong of them to live and weaken the others.
'But it's no good just staying alive. That's just living like rats. We have to save our knowledge, and add to it. That's why men like you are needed. We must make great safe places deep underground, and get all the books we can; not novels and poetry, but ideas, science books. We must go to the British Museum and choose the best books in it. Especially, we must keep our science - learn more.'
The soldier paused and laid a brown hand on my arm.
'In fact, it may not be so difficult to learn how their fighting- machines work. Think of four or five of them with men inside, firing Heat-Rays back at the Martians!'
For some time the imagination of the soldier, and the confidence and courage he showed, persuaded me completely. I believed in his idea of the future and in the possibility of his plans. We talked like this through the early morning, and later came out of the bushes. After checking the sky for Martians, we hurried quickly to the house on Putney Hill where he had his hiding-place.
There I saw the work he had spent a week on. It was a passage about ten metres long, designed to reach the main drain on Putney Hill. For the first time I began to think that there was some distance between his dreams and his powers, because I could dig a hole like this in a day. But I believed in him enough to work with him all that morning at his digging.
As we worked I thought about the job, and soon some doubts began to come into my mind. I thought about the distance to the drain and the chances of missing it completely. I also felt that it would be easier to get into the drain and dig back towards the house. And just as I was beginning to face these things, the soldier stopped digging and looked at me.
'We're working well,' he said. 'Let's stop. I think it's time we looked around from the top of the house.'
I wanted to continue, but a thought came to me.
'Why were you walking around on the common,' I asked, 'instead of being here?'
'Taking the air,' he said. 'It's safer by night.'
'But the work?'
'Oh, one can't always work,' he said, and in a flash I understood the man clearly.
We went together to the roof and stood on a ladder, looking out of the roof door. No Martians could be seen. We went back down into the house. Neither of us wanted to start digging again, and when he suggested a meal I was quite happy to agree.
Afterwards we drank wine and played cards. He won most of the games, and when we did not want to play any more I went back up on the roof.
I stayed there for a long time, looking north over the city. I began to feel that I had failed my wife, and decided to leave this dreamer of great things and to go on into London. There, it seemed to me, I had the best chance of learning what the Martians and human beings were doing for death
Dead London
After I had said goodbye to the soldier, I went down the hill, along the High Street and across the bridge to Fulham. There was black dust on the road after the bridge, and it grew thicker in Fulham. The streets were horribly quiet. I found some old bread in a baker's shop there. After that, the streets became clear of powder and I passed some white houses which were on fire. The noise of burning was actually better than silence.
Beyond Fulham the streets were quiet again. Here I found more black powder and some dead bodies. I saw about ten along Fulham Road. They had been dead for many days, so I hurried quickly past them. The black powder covered them and softened their shapes. One or two had been partly eaten by dogs.
Where there was no black powder, it was curiously like Sunday in the financial area of London, with the closed shops, the houses locked up and the curtains closed. In some places thieves had been at work, but usually only at the food and wine shops. A jeweller's window had been broken open in one place, but the thief had clearly been chased away, because a number of gold chains and a watch were lying on the pavement. I did not take the trouble to touch them. Further down the road, a woman in torn clothes was sitting on a doorstep. The hand that hung over her knee was cut, and blood had fallen onto her dirty brown dress. A broken bottle of wine had formed a pool on the pavement. She seemed asleep, but she was dead.
The silence grew greater. But it was not the stillness of death - it was the stillness of expectation. At any time the destruction that had already happened to the north-western borders of the city, that had destroyed Ealing, might strike among these houses and leave them smoking ruins. It was an empty city waiting for death...
In South Kensington the streets were clear of dead people and of black powder, and near there I first heard the howling. It started very quietly. It was a sad movement between two notes, 'Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,' continuing without stopping. When I passed streets that ran to the north it grew louder, and then houses and buildings seemed to cut it off again. It came most loudly down Exhibition Road. I stopped, staring towards Kensington Gardens.
It seemed that all the empty houses had found a voice for their fear and loneliness.
'Ulla, ulla, ulla,' cried that inhuman note - great waves of sound sweeping down the broad, sunlit road, between the tall buildings on each side. I turned to the north, towards the iron gates of Hyde Park. The voice grew stronger and stronger, although I could see nothing above the roof-tops on the north side of the park except some smoke to the north-west.
'Ulla, ulla, ulla,' cried the voice, coming, it seemed to me, from the district around Regent's Park. The howl affected my mind, and my mood changed. I also found that I was very tired, and hungry and thirsty again.
It was already past midday. Why was I walking alone in this city of the dead? I thought of old friends that I had forgotten for years. I thought of the poisons in the chemists' shops, the bottles in the wine shops...
I came into Oxford Street by Marble Arch, and here again were black powder and several bodies. After a lot of trouble, I managed to break into a pub and find some food and drink. I was tired after eating and went into the room behind the bar and slept on a black leather sofa that I found there.
I awoke to find that sad howling still in my ears: 'Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,' It was now getting dark, and after I had found some bread and cheese in the bar I walked on through the silent squares to Baker Street and so came at last to Regents Park. And as I came out of the top of Baker Street, I saw far away over the trees, in the clearness of the sunset, the top of the Martian fighting-machine from winch this howling came. I was not frightened. I watched it for some time, but it did not move. It appeared to be standing and calling, for no reason that I could discover.
I tried to work out a plan of action. That non-stop sound of 'Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla' confused my mind. Perhaps I was too tired to be very afraid. Certainly I was more curious to know the reason for this howling. I turned and went into Park Road, intending to go round the edge of the park, with houses between us to keep me safe, and get a view of this unmoving, howling Martian from the direction of St John's Wood.
I came to a destroyed building-machine halfway to St John's Wood station. At first I thought a house had fallen across the road, but when I climbed up on the ruins I saw, with a shock, this great machine lying, with its tentacles bent and twisted, among the ruins that it had made. The front part of it was pushed in. It seemed that it had been driven blindly straight at the house, and had been turned over when the house fell on it.
Wondering about all that I had seen, I moved on towards Primrose Hill. Far away, through a space in the trees, I saw a second Martian fighting-machine, as unmoving as the first, standing in the park near the Zoo. Then the sound of 'Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla' stopped. The silence came suddenly. And now night, the mother of fear and mystery, was coming.
London around me looked like a city of ghosts. My imagination heard a thousand noiseless enemies moving. Terror came to me. In front of me the road became black and I saw the twisted shape of a body lying across the pavement. I could not go on. I turned down St John's Wood Road and ran away from this terrible stillness.
I hid from the night and the silence until long after midnight, in a garden hut in Harrow Road. But before dawn my courage returned, and while the stars were still in the sky I turned again towards Regent's Park. I lost my way among the streets, and soon saw down a long road, in the half-light of the early dawn, the curve of Primrose Hill. There, on the top, high against the early morning stars, was a third Martian, standing still like the others.
A mad idea came to me. I would die and end it. And I would save myself even the trouble of killing myself. I marched on without fear towards this great machine, and then, as I came nearer and the light grew, I saw that a number of black birds were circling and gathering around the top of it. I began to feel very happy and I started running along the road.
I got onto the grass before the sun rose. Great piles of earth had formed around a pit at the top of the hill - the final and largest one the Martians had made - and from behind these piles thin smoke rose against the sky. Against the sky-line an eager dog ran and disappeared. The thought that had flashed into my mind grew real, and believable. I felt no fear, only a wild, shaking excitement, as I ran up the hill towards the unmoving Martian. Out of the top of it hung long, brown pieces of flesh, which the birds were tearing away.
In another moment I had climbed a pile of earth and stood on its top, and the pit was below me. It was a large space, with enormous machines here and there within it, great piles of material and strange buildings. And all around it, some in their overturned war-machines and some in building-machines, and ten of them lying in a row, were the Martians - dead! They had been killed by germs against which their systems could not fight; killed, after all man's machines had failed, by the smallest things that God has put on this Earth.
It had happened in this way, and I and many others did not see that it would happen because terror and disaster had blinded our minds. These germs of disease have killed people and animals since the beginning of time, but over these many years we have developed the ability to fight against them. But there are no germs on Mars, and as soon as the Martians arrived, as soon as they drank and fed, our tiny friends began to destroy them. By paying with a million lives, human beings have bought their right to live on Earth. It is our home and would be ours even if the Martians were ten times as strong as they are.
I stood staring into the pit, and my heart grew wonderfully happy as the rising sun lit up the world around me. The pit was still in darkness. Only the tops of the great engines, so unearthly in their shape, could be seen in the morning light. I heard a large number of dogs fighting over the bodies that lay in the darkness at the bottom of the pit.
Across the pit, on its further edge, lay the great flying-machine which they had been testing in our heavier atmosphere when disease and death stopped them. Death had not come a day too soon. At the sound of birds overhead I looked up at the enormous fighting-machine that would never fight again, at the pieces of red flesh that dropped down onto the overturned seats on the top of Primrose Hill.
I turned and looked down the slope of the hill at those two other Martians that I had seen the previous night. They were surrounded by birds now. One of them had died as it had been crying to its friends. Perhaps it was the last to die, and its voice had gone on and on until its machinery stopped. They stood now, harmless tripods of shining metal, against the brightness of the rising sun.
All around the pit, and saved from everlasting destruction, lay the great city. And as I looked at it, and realized that the shadows had been rolled back, and that people might still live in its streets, and that this dear city of mine might be once more alive and powerful again, I felt such emotion that I was very close to tears.
The trouble had ended. That same day the healing would begin. People who were still alive would start to return, and life would come back to the empty streets. The sound of tools would soon be heard in all the burnt and broken houses. At the thought, I lifted my hands towards the sky and began thanking God. In a year, I thought, we would rebuild all that had been destroyed.
Then came the thought of myself, of my wife, and the old life of hope and tender helpfulness that had ended forever.
Wreckage
And now comes the strangest thing in my story. But perhaps it is not totally strange. I remember, clearly and in great detail, all that I did that day until the time when I stood crying on the top of Primrose Hill. And then I forget.
I know nothing of the next three days. I have learned since then that I was not the first discoverer of the Martian defeat -several wanderers like me had already known about it on the previous night. One man - the first - had even managed to send a telegram to Paris. From there the happy news had flashed all over the world; a thousand cities, living in great fear, suddenly- turned on all their lights.
They knew of it in Dublin, Edinburgh, Manchester and Birmingham at the time when I stood on the edge of the pit. Already men, crying with joy, as I have heard, were getting onto trains to go to London. Men on bicycles rode through the countryside shouting the news to all.
And the food! Across the Channel, across the Irish Sea, across the Atlantic, corn, bread and meat were coming to us. All the ships in the world seemed to be coming to London in those days. But I have no memory of all of this. For three days I walked aimlessly, a madman. Then I found myself in a house of kind people, who had found me. They have told me since that I was singing a crazy song about 'The Last Man Left Alive! The Last Man Left Alive!' Although they were troubled with their own affairs, these people were very helpful to me. They gave me a place to stay and protected me from myself.
Very gently, when my mind was working again, they told me all they knew about what had happened in Leatherhead. Two days after I was imprisoned it had been destroyed, with every person in it, by a Martian. He had swept it all away for no reason at all, it seemed.
I was a lonely man, and they were very kind to me. I was a sad one too, and they were patient with me. I stayed with them for four days after my recovery. All that time I felt a growing need to look again at whatever remained of the little life that had seemed so happy and bright in my past. My hosts tried to change my mind but at last, promising faithfully to return to them, I went out again into the streets that had lately been so dark and strange and empty.
Already they were busy with returning people; in places there were even shops open. I remember how bright that day seemed as I went sadly back to the little house in Woking - how busy the streets were, and how full of life. But then I noticed how ill the people looked and how many of them still wore old and dirty clothes. The churches were giving out bread sent to us by the French government, and tired-looking policemen stood at the corners of every street.
At the end of Waterloo Bridge I bought a copy of the first newspaper to reappear. I learned nothing new except that already in one week the examination of the Martians' machines had produced amazing results. Among other things, the newspaper said that the 'Secret of Flying' had been discovered. I did not believe this at the time.
At Waterloo I found that free trains were taking people to their homes. The first rush had already ended and there were few people on the train. The city we went through was dirty with the powder of the Black Smoke, despite two days of thunderstorms and rain.
All down the line from there, the country looked empty and unfamiliar. Wimbledon particularly had suffered, and beyond there I saw piles of earth around the sixth cylinder. A number of people were standing by it, and some soldiers were busy in the middle. Over it was a British flag, flying cheerfully in the wind.
The line on the London side of Woking station was still being repaired, so I got off the train at Byfleet and took the road to Maybury, past the place where I had seen the Martian fighting- machine in the thunderstorm. I was curious and I stopped to find the twisted and broken dog-cart with the whitened bones of the horse. For a time I stood and looked at the remains...
Then I returned through the wood towards my home. A man standing at the open door of a house greeted me by name as I passed. I looked at my own house with a quick flash of hope that died immediately. The door had been broken, and it was opening slowly as I approached.
It blew shut again. The curtains of my study blew out of the open window from which I and the soldier had watched the dawn. No one had closed it since then. I went into the hall, and the house felt empty. The stair carpet was discolored where I had sat, wet to the skin from the thunderstorm on that first terrible night. Our muddy footsteps still went up the stairs.
I followed them to my study and found, lying on my writing- table, the page of work I had left on the afternoon of the opening of the cylinder. For some time I stood reading it. I remembered how I could not concentrate that morning, hardly a month before, and how I had stopped work to get my newspaper from the newsboy. I remembered how I went to the garden gate as he came past, and how I had listened to his odd story of 'Men from Mars'.
I came down and went into the dining-room. There were the remains of the meat and the bread, now gone bad, where the soldier and I had left them. My home was a lonely place. I realized the stupidity of the small hope I had held on to for so long. And then a strange thing happened.
'The house is deserted,' said a voice. 'No one has been here for ten days. Don't stay here and make yourself unhappy. No one escaped except you.'
I was shocked. Had I spoken my thought aloud? I turned, and the door to the garden was open behind me. I took a step towards it and stood looking out.
And there, amazed and afraid, as I too stood amazed and afraid, were my cousin and my wife - my wife white and tearless. She gave a faint cry.
'I came here,' she said. 'I knew-knew -' She put her hand to her throat and started to fall. I stepped forwards and caught her in my arms.
I can only regret now, as I finish my story, how little I can help with the many questions which are still unanswered. In one area I shall certainly be criticized. I know very little about medical matters, but it seems to me most likely that the Martians were killed by germs.
Certainly, in all the bodies of the Martians that were examined after the war, no germs were found except ones that came from Earth. Besides this, we still know very little about the Black Smoke, and the way that the Heat-Ray worked remains a puzzle.
A question of more serious interest is the possibility of another attack from the Martians. I do not think that nearly enough attention is being paid to this. Every time the planet Mars comes near to us, I worry that they might try again. We should be prepared. It should be possible to find the position of the gun from which the shots came, to watch this part of the planet carefully and be ready.
In that case, the cylinder could be destroyed before it was cool enough for the Martians to come out, or they could be killed by guns as soon as the door opened. It seems to me that they have lost a great advantage in the failure of their first surprise. Possibly they also believe this.
One astronomer has given excellent reasons for supposing that the Martians have actually landed on Venus. Seven months ago, when these planets were close together, faint, dark marks appeared on photographs which suggested that a cylinder had been fired from one to the other.
However, whether we expect another attack or not, our views of the human future must now be changed by these events. We have learned that we cannot think of this planet as a safe home for humans. We can never know what unseen good or evil might come to us suddenly out of space. Perhaps this attack from Mars will be helpful to us in the end. It has taken away our confidence in the future, which was making us soft; it has given great help to science, and it has made us think of human beings as one family.
Perhaps, across the great distances of space, the Martians have watched what happened to the ones that landed on Earth and learned their lesson - and have found a safer home on the planet Venus. Even if that is true, for many years we will continue to watch Mars carefully, and all falling stars will make us afraid.
The war has broadened people's minds enormously. Before it there was a general belief that there was no life in space apart from on our tiny planet. If the Martians can reach Venus, there is no reason to think that this is impossible for us. So when the slow cooling of the sun means that we cannot continue to live on Earth, it may be that life which began here can reach out and continue there.
But that is a distant dream. We may, on the other hand, still be destroyed by the Martians. The future may belong to them and not to us.
I must admit that the trouble and danger of our time have left a continuing sense of doubt and fear in my mind. I sit in my study writing by lamplight, and suddenly I see the valley below on fire again, and feel that the house around me is empty and lonely. I go out into the Byfleet Road, and vehicles pass me, a boy on a bicycle, children going to school - and suddenly they become strange and unreal, and I hurry on again with the soldier through the hot, dangerous silence. At night I see the black powder-darkening the silent streets, and the twisted bodies covered by it. They stand up in front of me, torn and dog-bitten. They talk and grow angry, paler, uglier, and I wake, cold and shaking, in the darkness.
I go to London and see the busy crowds in Fleet Street and the Strand, and it comes to my mind that they are just the ghosts of the past, walking the streets that I have seen silent and empty, spirits in a dead city. And it is strange, too, to stand on Primrose Hill, as I did only a day before writing this last chapter. I saw the houses stretching away and disappearing into the smoke and mist, people walking up and down between the flower-beds, and the sightseers around the Martian machine that still stands there. I heard the noise of playing children and remembered the deep silence of the dawn of that last great day...
And it is strangest of all to hold my wife's hand again, and to think that I have thought of her, and that she has thought of me, among the dead.
It was about eleven o'clock in the morning, mid October, with the sun not shining and a look of hard wet rain in the clearness of the foothills. I was wearing my powder-blue suit, with dark blue shirt, tie and display handkerchief, black brogues, black wool socks with dark blue clocks on them. I was neat, clean, shaved and sober, and I didn't care who knew it. I was everything the well-dressed private detective ought to be. I was calling on four million dollars.
The main hallway of the Sternwood place was two stories high. Over the entrance doors, which would have let in a troop of Indian elephants, there was a broad stained-glass panel showing a knight in dark armor rescuing a lady who was tied to a tree and didn't have any clothes on but some very long and convenient hair. The knight had pushed the vizor of his helmet back to be sociable, and he was fiddling with the knots on the ropes that tied the lady to the tree and not getting anywhere.
I stood there and thought that if I lived in the house, I would sooner or later have to climb up there and help him. He didn't seem to be really trying.
There were French doors at the back of the hall, beyond them a wide sweep of emerald grass to a white garage, in front of which a slim dark young chauffeur in shiny black leggings was dusting a maroon Packard convertible. Beyond the garage were some decorative trees trimmed as carefully as poodle dogs. Beyond them a large green house with a domed roof. Then more trees and beyond everything the solid, uneven, comfortable line of the foothills.
On the east side of the hall a free staircase, tile-paved, rose to a gallery with a wrought-iron railing and another piece of stained-glass romance. Large hard chairs with rounded red plush seats were backed into the vacant spaces of the wall round about. They didn't look as if anybody had ever sat in them. In the middle of the west wall there was a big empty fireplace with a brass screen in four hinged panels, and over the fireplace a marble mantel with cupids at the corners.
Above the mantel there was a large oil portrait, and above the portrait two bullet-torn or moth-eaten cavalry pennants crossed in a glass frame. The portrait was a stiffly posed job of an officer in full regimentals of about the time of the Mexican war. The officer had a neat black Imperial, black mustachios, hot hard coalblack eyes, and the general look of a man it would pay to get along with. I thought this might be General Sternwood's grandfather. It could hardly be the General himself, even though I had heard he was pretty far gone in years to have a couple of daughters still in the dangerous twenties.
I was still staring at the hot black eyes when a door opened far back under the stairs. It wasn't the butler coming back. It was a girl. She was twenty or so, small and delicately put together, but she looked durable. She wore pale blue slacks and they looked well on her. She walked as if she were floating. Her hair was a fine tawny wave cut much shorter than the current fashion of pageboy tresses curled in at the bottom. Her eyes were slategray, and had almost no expression when they looked at me. She came over near me and smiled with her mouth and she had little sharp predatory teeth, as white as fresh orange pits and as shiny as porcelain. They glistened between her thin too taut lips. Her face lacked color and didn't look too healthy.
"Tall, aren't you?" she said.
"I didn't mean to be."
Her eyes rounded. She was puzzled. She was thinking. I could see, even on that short acquaintance, that thinking was always going to be a bother to her.
"Handsome too," she said. "And I bet you know it."
I grunted.
"What's your name?"
"Reilly," I said. "Doghouse Reilly."
"That's a funny name."
She bit her lip and turned her head a little and looked at me along her eyes. Then she lowered her lashes until they almost cuddled her cheeks and slowly raised them again, like a theater curtain. I was to get to know that trick. That was supposed to make me roll over on my back with all four paws in the air.
"Are you a prizefighter?" she asked, when I didn't.
"Not exactly. I'm a sleuth."
"A-a-" She tossed her head angrily, and the rich color of it glistened in the rather dim light of the big hall. "You're making fun of me."
"Uh-uh."
"What?"
"Get on with you," I said. "You heard me."
"You didn't say anything. You're just a big tease." She put a thumb up and bit it. It was a curiously shaped thumb, thin and narrow like an extra finger, with no curve in the first joint. She bit it and sucked it slowly, turning it around in her mouth like a baby with a comforter.
"You're awfully tall," she said. Then she giggled with secret merriment. Then she turned her body slowly and lithely, without lifting her feet. Her hands dropped limp at her sides. She tilted herself towards me on her toes. She fell straight back into my arms. I had to catch her or let her crack her head on the tessellated floor. I caught her under her arms and she went rubber-legged on me instantly. I had to hold her close to hold her up. When her head was against my chest she screwed it around and giggled at me.
"You're cute," she giggled. "I'm cute too."
I didn't say anything. So the butler chose that convenient moment to come back through the French doors and see me holding her.
It didn't seem to bother him. He was a tall, thin, silver man, sixty or close to it or a little past it. He had blue eyes as remote as eyes could be. His skin was smooth and bright and he moved like a man with very sound muscles. He walked slowly across the floor towards us and the girl jerked away from me. She flashed across the room to the foot of the stairs and went up them like a deer. She was gone before I could draw a long breath and let it out.
The butler said tonelessly: "The General will see you now, Mr. Marlowe."
I pushed my lower jaw up off my chest and nodded at him.
"Who was that?"
"Miss Carmen Sternwood, sir."
"You ought to wean her. She looks old enough."
He looked at me with grave politeness and repeated what he had said.
We went out at the French doors and along a smooth red-flagged path that skirted the far aide of the lawn from the garage. The boyish-looking chauffeur had a big black and chromium sedan out now and was dusting that. The path took us along to the side of the greenhouse and the butler opened a door for me and stood aside. It opened into a sort of vestibule that was about as warm as a slow oven. He came in after me, shut the outer door, opened an inner door and we went through that. Then it was really hot. The air was thick, wet, steamy and larded with the cloying smell of tropical orchids in bloom. The glass walls and roof were heavily misted and big drops of moisture splashed down on the plants. The light had an unreal greenish color, like light filtered through an aquarium tank. The plants filled the place, a forest of them, with nasty meaty leaves and stalks like the newly washed fingers of dead men. They smelled as overpowering as boiling alcohol under a blanket.
The butler did his best to get me through without being smacked in the face by the sodden leaves, and after a while we came to a clearing in the middle of the jungle, under the domed roof. Here, in a space of hexagonal flags, an old red Turkish rug was laid down and on the rug was a wheel chair, and in the wheel chair an old and obviously dying man watched us come with black eyes from which all fire had died long ago, but which still had the coal-black directness of the eyes in the portrait that hung above the mantel in the hail. The rest of his face was a leaden mask, with the bloodless lips and the sharp nose and the sunken temples and the outward-turning earlobes of approaching dissolution. His long narrow body was wrapped - in that heat - in a traveling rug and a faded red bathrobe. His thin claw-like hands were folded loosely on the rug, purple-nailed. A few locks of dry white hair clung to his scalp, like wild flowers fighting for life on a bare rock.
The butler stood in front of him and said:
"This is Mr. Marlowe, General."
The old man didn't move or speak, or even nod. He just looked at me lifelessly. The butler pushed a damp wicker chair against the backs of my legs and I sat down. He took my hat with a deft scoop.
Then the old man dragged his voice up from the bottom of a well and said:
"Brandy, Norris. How do you like your brandy, sir?"
"Any way at all," I said.
The butler went away among the abominable plants. The General spoke again, slowly, using his strength as carefully as an out-of-work show-girl uses her last good pair of stockings.
"I used to like mine with champagne. The champagne as cold as Valley Forge and about a third of a glass of brandy beneath it. You may take your coat off, sir. It's too hot in here for a man with blood in his veins."
I stood up and peeled off my coat and got a handkerchief out and mopped my face and neck and the backs of my wrists. St. Louis in August had nothing on that place. I sat down again and I felt automatically for a cigarette and then stopped. The old man caught the gesture and smiled faintly.
"You may smoke, sir. I like the smell of tobacco."
I lit the cigarette and blew a lungful at him and he sniffed at it like a terrier at a rathole. The faint smile pulled at the shadowed corners of his mouth.
"A nice state of affairs when a man has to indulge his vices by proxy," he said dryly. "You are looking at a very dull survival of a rather gaudy life, a cripple paralyzed in both legs and with only half of his lower belly. There's very little that I can eat and my sleep is so close to waking that it is hardly worth the name. I seem to exist largely on heat, like a newborn spider, and the orchids are an excuse for the heat. Do you like orchids?"
"Not particularly," I said.
The General half-closed his eyes.
"They are nasty things. Their flesh is too much like the flesh of men. And their perfume has the rotten sweetness of a prostitute."
I stared at him with my mouth open. The soft wet heat was like a pall around us. The old man nodded, as if his neck was afraid of the weight of his head.
Then the butler came pushing back through the jungle with a teawagon, mixed me a brandy and soda, swathed the copper ice bucket with a damp napkin, and went away softly among the orchids. A door opened and shut behind the jungle.
I sipped the drink. The old man licked his lips watching me, over and over again, drawing one lip slowly across the other with a funereal absorption, like an undertaker dry-washing his hands.
"Tell me about yourself, Mr. Marlowe. I suppose I have a right to ask?"
"Sure, but there's very little to tell. I'm thirty-three years old, went to college once and can still speak English if there's any demand for it. There isn't much in my trade. I worked for Mr. Wilde, the District Attorney, as an investigator once. His chief investigator, a man named Bernie Ohls, called me and told me you wanted to see me. I'm unmarried because I don't like policemen's wives."
"And a little bit of a cynic," the old man smiled. "You didn't like working for Wilde?"
"I was fired. For insubordination. I test very high on insubordination, General."
"I always did myself, sir. I'm glad to hear it. What do you know about my family?"
"I'm told you are a widower and have two young daughters, both pretty and both wild. One of them has been married three times, the last time to an ex-bootlogger who went in the trade by the name of Rusty Regan. That's all I heard, General."
"Did any of it strike you as peculiar?"
"The Rusty Regan part, maybe. But I always got along with bootleggers myself."
He smiled his faint economical smile.
"It seems I do too. I'm very fond of Rusty. A big curly-headed Irishman from Clonmel, with sad eyes and a smile as wide as Wilshire Boulevard. The first time I saw him I thought he might be what you are probably thinking he was, an adventurer who happened to get himself wrapped up in some velvet."
"You must have liked him," I said. "You learned to talk the language."
He put his thin bloodless hands under the edge of the rug. I put my cigarette stub out and finished my drink.
"He was the breath of life to me - while he lasted. He spent hours with me, sweating like a pig, drinking brandy by the quart and telling me stories of the Irish revolution. He had been an officer in the I.R.A. He wasn't even legally in the United States. It was a ridiculous marriage of course, and it probably didn't last a month, as a marriage. I'm telling you the family secrets, Mr. Marlowe."
"They're still secrets," I said. "What happened to him?"
The old man looked at me woodenly.
"He went away, a month ago. Abruptly, without a word to anyone. Without saying good-by to me. That hurt a little, but he had been raised in a rough school. I'll hear from him one of these days. Meantime I am being blackmailed again."
I said: "Again?"
He brought his hands from under the rug with a brown envelope in them.
"I should have been very sorry for anybody who tried to blackmail me while Rusty was around. A few months before he came - that is to say about nine or ten months ago - I paid a man named Joe Brody five thousand dollars to let my younger daughter Carmen alone."
"Ah," I said.
He moved his thin white eyebrows.
"That means what?"
"Nothing," I said.
He went on staring at me, half frowning. Then he said:
"Take this envelope and examine it. And help yourself to the brandy."
I took the envelope off his knees and sat down with it again. I wiped off the palms of my hands and turned it around. It was addressed to General Guy Stemwood, 3765 Alta Brea Crescent; West Hollywood, California. The address was in ink, in the slanted printing engineers use. The envelope was slit. I opened it up and took out a brown card and three slips of stiff paper. The card was of thin brown linen, printed in gold: "Mr. Arthur Gwynn Geiger." No address. Very small in the lower left-hand corner: "Rare Books and De Luxe Editions." I turned the card over. More of the slanted printing on the back. "Dear Sir: In spite of the legal uncollectibility of the enclosed, which frankly represent gambling debts, I assume you might wish them honored. Respectfully, A. G. Geiger."
I looked at the slips of stiffish white paper. They were promissory notes filled out in ink, dated on several dates early in the month before, September. "On Demand I promise to pay to Arthur Gwynn Geiger or Order the sum of One Thousand Dollars ($1000.00) without interest. Value Received. Carmen Sternwood."
The written part was in a sprawling moronic handwriting with a lot of fat curlicues and circles for dots.
I mixed myself another drink and sipped it and put the exhibit aside.
"Your conclusions?" the General asked.
"I haven't any yet. Who is this Arthur Gwynn Geiger?"
"I haven't the faintest idea."
"What does Carmen say?"
"I haven't asked her. I don't intend to. If I did, she would suck her thumb and look coy."
I said: "I met her in the hall. She did that to me. Then she tried to sit in my lap."
Nothing changed in his expression. His clasped hands rested peacefully on the edge of the rug, and the heat; which made me feel like a New England boiled dinner, didn't seem to make him even warm.
"Do I have to be polite?" I asked. "Or can I just be natural?"
"I haven't noticed that you suffer from many inhibitions, Mr. Marlowe."
"Do the two girls run around together?"
"I think not. I think they go their separate and slightly divergent roads to perdition. Vivian is spoiled, exacting, smart and quite ruthless. Carmen is a child who likes to pull wings off flies. Neither of them has any more moral sense than a cat. Neither have I. No Sternwood ever had. Proceed."
"They're well educated, I suppose. They know what they're doing."
"Vivian went to good schools of the snob type and to college. Carmen went to half a dozen schools of greater and greater liberality, and ended up where she started. I presume they both had, and still have, all the usual vices. If I sound a little sinister as a parent, Mr. Marlowe, it is because my hold on life is too slight to include any Victorian hypocrisy." He leaned his head back and closed his eyes, then opened them again suddenly. "I need not add that a man who indulges in parenthood for the first time at the age of fifty-four deserves all he gets."
I sipped my drink and nodded. The pulse in his lean gray throat throbbed visibly and yet so slowly that it was hardly a pulse at all. An old man two thirds dead and still determined to believe he could take it.
"Your conclusions? he snapped suddenly.
"I'd pay him."
"Why?"
"It's a question of a little money against a lot of annoyance. There has to be something behind it. But nobody's going to break your heart, if it hasn't been done already. And it would take an awful lot of chiselers an awful lot of time to rob you of enough so that you'd even notice it."
"I have pride, sir," he said coldly.
"Somebody's counting on that. It's the easiest way to fool them. That or the police. Geiger can collect on these notes, unless you can show fraud. Instead of that he makes you a present of them and admits they are gambling debts, which gives you a defense, even if he had kept the notes. If he's a crook, he knows his onions, and if he's an honest man doing a little loan business on the side, he ought to have his money. Who was this Joe Brody you paid the five thousand dollars to?"
"Some kind of gambler. I hardly recall. Norris would know. My butler."
"Your daughters have money in their own right, General?"
"Vivian has, but not a great deal. Carmen is still a minor under her mother's will. I give them both generous allowances."
I said: "I can take this Geiger off your back, General, if that's what you want. Whoever he is and whatever he has. It may cost you a little money, besides what you pay me. And of course it won't get you anything. Sugaring them never does. You're already listed on their book of nice names."
"I see." He shrugged his wide sharp shoulders in the faded red bathrobe. "A moment ago you said pay him. Now you say it won't get me anything."
"I mean it might be cheaper and easier to stand for a certain amount of squeeze. That's all."
"I'm afraid I'm rather an impatient man, Mr. Marlowe. What are your charges?"
"I get twenty-five a day and expenses - when I'm lucky."
"I see. It seems reasonable enough for removing morbid growths from people's backs. Quite a delicate operation. You realize that, I hope. You'll make your operation as little of a shock to the patient as possible? There might be several of them, Mr. Marlowe."
I finished my second drink and wiped my lips and my face. The heat didn't get any less hot with the brandy in me. The General blinked at me and plucked at the edge of his rug.
"Can I make a deal with this guy, if I think he's within hooting distance of being on the level?"
"Yes. The matter is now in your hands. I never do things by halves."
"I'll take him out," I said. "He'll think a bridge fell on him."
"I'm sure you will. And now I must excuse myself. I am tired." He reached out and touched the bell on the arm of his chair. The cord was plugged into a black cable that wound along the side of the deep dark green boxes in which the orchids grew and festered. He closed his eyes, opened them again in a brief bright stare, and settled back among his cushions. The lids dropped again and he didn't pay any more attention to me.
I stood up and lifted my coat off the back of the damp wicker chair and went off with it among the orchids, opened the two doors and stood outside in the brisk October air getting myself some oxygen. The chauffeur over by the garage had gone away. The butler came along the red path with smooth light steps and his back as straight as an ironing board. I shrugged into my coat and watched him come.
He stopped about two feet from me and said gravely:
"Mrs. Regan would like to see you before you leave, sir. And in the matter of money the General has instructed me to give you a check for whatever seems desirable."
"Instructed you how?"
He looked puzzled, then he smiled.
"Ah, I see, sir. You are, of course, a detective. By the way he rang his bell."
"You write his checks?"
"I have that privilege."
"That ought to save you from a pauper's grave. No money now, thanks. What does Mrs. Regan want to see me about?"
His blue eyes gave me a smooth level look.
"She has a misconception of the purpose of your visit, sir."
"Who told her anything about my visit?"
"Her windows command the greenhouse. She saw us go in. I was obliged to tell her who you were."
"I don't like that," I said.
His blue eyes frosted.
"Are you attempting to tell me my duties, sir?"
"No. But I'm having a lot of fun trying to guess what they are."
We stared at each other for a moment. He gave me a blue glare and turned away.
This room was too big, the ceiling was too high, the doors were too tall, and the white carpet that went from wall to wall looked like a fresh fall of snow at Lake Arrowhead. There were full-length mirrors and crystal doodads all over the place. The ivory furniture had chromium on it, and the enormous ivory drapes lay tumbled on the white carpet a yard from the windows. The white made the ivory look dirty and the ivory made the white look bled out. The windows stared towards the darkening foothills. It was going to rain soon. There was pressure in the air already.
I sat down on the edge of a deep soft chair and looked at Mrs. Regan. She was worth a stare. She was trouble. She was stretched out on a modernistic chaise-longue with her slippers off, so I stared at her legs in the sheerest silk stockings. They seemed to be arranged to stare at. They were visible to the knee and one of them well beyond. The knees were dimpled, not bony and sharp. The calves were beautiful, the ankles long and slim and with enough melodic line for a tone poem. She was tall and rangy and strong-looking. Her head was against an ivory satin cushion. Her hair was black and wiry and parted in the middle and she had the hot black eyes of the portrait in the hall. She had a good mouth and a good chin. There was a sulky droop to her lips and the lower lip was full.
She had a drink. She took a swallow from it and gave me a cool level stare over the rim of the glass.
"So you're a private detective," she said. "I didn't know they really existed, except in books. Or else they were greasy little men snooping around hotels."
There was nothing in that for me, so I let it drift with the current.
She put her glass down on the flat arm of the chaise-longue and flashed an emerald and touched her hair. She said slowly:
"How did you like Dad?"
"I liked him," I said.
"He liked Rusty. I suppose you know who Rusty is?"
"Uh-huh."
"Rusty was earthy and vulgar at times, but he was very real. And he was a lot of fun for Dad. Rusty shouldn't have gone off like that. Dad feels very badly about it, although he won't say so. Or did he?"
"He said something about it."
"You're not much of a gusher, are you, Mr. Marlowe? But he wants to find him, doesn't he?"
I stared at her politely through a pause.
"Yes and no," I said.
"That's hardly an answer. Do you think you can find him?"
"I didn't say I was going to try. Why not try the Missing Persons Bureau? They have the organization. It's not a one-man job."
"Oh, Dad wouldn't hear of the police being brought into it." She looked at me smoothly across her glass again, emptied it, and rang a bell. A maid came into the room by a side door. She was a middle-aged woman with a long yellow gentle face, a long nose, no chin, large wet eyes. She looked like a nice old horse that had been turned out to pasture after long service. Mrs. Regan waved the empty glass at her and she mixed another drink and handed it to her and left the room, without a word, without a glance in my direction.
When the door shut Mrs. Regan said: "Well, how will you go about it then?"
"How and when did he skip out?"
"Didn't Dad tell you?"
I grinned at her with my head on one side. She flushed. Her hot black eyes looked mad.
"I don't see what there is to be cagey about," she snapped. "And I don't like your manners."
"I'm not crazy about yours," I said. "I didn't ask to see you. You sent for me. I don't mind your ritzing me or drinking your lunch out of a Scotch bottle. I don't mind your showing me your legs. They're very swell legs and it's a pleasure to make their acquaintance. I don't mind if you don't like my manners. They're pretty bad. I grieve over them during the long winter evenings. But don't waste your time trying to cross-examine me."
She slammed her glass down so hard that it slopped over on an ivory cushion. She swung her legs to the floor and stood up with her eyes sparking fire and her nostrils wide. Her mouth was open and her bright teeth glared at me. Her knuckles were white.
"People don't talk like that to me," she said thickly.
I sat there and grinned at her. Very slowly she closed her mouth and looked down at the spilled liquor. She sat down on the edge of the chaise-longue and cupped her chin in one hand.
"My God, you big dark handsome brute! I ought to throw a Buick at you."
I snicked a match on my thumbnail and for once it lit. I puffed smoke into the air and waited.
"I loathe masterful men," she said. "I simply loathe them."
"Just what is it you're afraid of, Mrs. Regan?"
Her eyes whitened. Then they darkened until they seemed to be all pupil. Her nostrils looked pinched.
"That wasn't what he wanted with you at all," she said in a strained voice that still had shreds of anger clinging to me. "About Rusty. Was it?"
"Better ask him."
She flared up again. "Get out! Damn you, get out!"
I stood up.
"Sit down!" she snapped.
I sat down. I flicked a finger at my palm and waited.
"Please," she said. "Please. You could find Rusty - if Dad wanted you to."
That didn't work either. I nodded and asked:
"When did he go?"
"One afternoon a month back. He just drove away in his car without saying a word. They found the car in a private garage somewhere."
"They?"
She got cunning. Her whole body seemed to go lax. Then she smiled at me winningly.
"He didn't tell you then." Her voice was almost gleeful, as if she bad outsmarted me. Maybe she had.
"He told me about Mr. Regan, yes. That's not what he wanted to see me about. Is that what you've been trying to get me to say?"
"I'm sure I don't care what you say."
I stood up again. "Then I'll be running along."
She didn't speak. I went over to the tall white door I had come in at. When I looked back she had her lip between her teeth and was worrying it like a puppy at the fringe of a rug.
I went out, down the tile staircase to the hall, and the butler drifted out of somewhere with my hat in his hand. I put it on while he opened the door for me.
"You made a mistake," I said. "Mrs. Regan didn't want to see me."
He inclined his silver head and said politely:
"I'm sorry, sir. I make many mistakes."
He closed the door against my back.
I stood on the step breathing my cigarette smoke and looking down a succession of terraces with flowerbeds and trimmed trees to the high iron fence with gilt spears that hemmed in the estate. A winding driveway dropped down between retaining walls to the open iron gates. Beyond the fence the hill sloped for several miles. On this lower level faint and far off I could just barely see some of the old wooden derricks of the oilfleld from which the Sternwoods had made their money. Most of the field was public park now, cleaned up and donated to the city by General Sternwood. But a little of it was still producing in groups of wells pumping five or six barrels a day. The Sternwoods, having moved up the hill, could no longer smell the stale sump water or the oil, but they could still look out of their front windows and see what had made them rich. If they wanted to. I didn't suppose they would want to.
I walked down a brick path from terrace to terrace, followed along inside the fence and so out of the gates to where I had left my car under a pepper tree on the street. Thunder was crackling in the foothills now and the sky above them was purple-black. It was going to rain hard. The air had the damp foretaste of rain. I put the top up on my convertible before I started downtown.
She had lovely legs. I would say that for her. They were a couple of pretty smooth citizens, she and her father. He was probably just trying me out; the job he had given me was a lawyer's job. Even if Mr. Arthur Gwynn Geiger, Rare Books and De Luxe Editions, turned out to be a blackmailer, it was still a lawyer's job. Unless there was a lot more to it than met the eye. At a casual glance I thought I might have a lot of fun finding out.
I drove down to the Hollywood public library and did a little superficial research in a stuffy volume called Famous First Editions. Half an hour of it made me need my lunch.
A. G. Geiger's place was a store frontage on the north side of the boulevard near Las Palmas. The entrance door was set far back in the middle and there was a copper trim on the windows, which were backed with Chinese screens, so I couldn't see into the store. There was a lot of oriental junk in the windows. I didn't know whether it was any good, not being a collector of antiques, except unpaid bills. The entrance door was plate glass, but I couldn't see much through that either, because the store was very dim. A building entrance adjoined it on one side and on the other was a glittering credit jewelry establishment. The jeweler stood in his entrance, teetering on his heels and looking bored, a tall handsome white-haired Jew in lean dark clothes, with about nine carats of diamond on his right hand. A faint knowing smile curved his lips when I turned into Geiger's store. I let the door close softly behind me and walked on a thick blue rug that paved the floor from wall to wall. There were blue leather easy chairs with smoke stands beside them. A few sets of tooled leather bindings were set out on narrow polished tables, between book ends. There were more tooled bindings in glass cases on the walls. Nice-looking merchandise, the kind a rich promoter would buy by the yard and have somebody paste his bookplate in. At the back there was a grained wood partition with a door in the middle of it, shut. In the corner made by the partition and one wall a woman sat behind a small desk with a carved wooden lantern on it.
She got up slowly and swayed towards me in a tight black dress that didn't reflect any light. She had long thighs and she walked with a certain something I hadn't often seen in bookstores. She was an ash blonde with greenish eyes, beaded lashes, hair waved smoothly back from ears in which large jet buttons glittered. Her fingernails were silvered. In spite of her getup she looked as if she would have a hall bedroom accent.
She approached me with enough sex appeal to stampede a business men's lunch and tilted her head to finger a stray, but not very stray, tendril of softly glowing hair. Her smile was tentative, but could be persuaded to be nice.
"Was it something?" she enquired.
I had my horn-rimmed sunglasses on. I put my voice high and let a bird twitter in it.
"Would you happen to have a Ben Hur 1860?"
She didn't say: "Huh?" but she wanted to. She smiled bleakly.
"A first edition?"
"Third," I said. "The one with the erratum on page 116."
"I'm afraid not - at the moment."
"How about a Chevalier Audubon 1840 - the full set, of course?"
"Er - not at the moment," she purred harshly. Her smile was now hanging by its teeth and eyebrows and wondering what it would hit when it dropped.
"You do sell books?" I said in my polite falsetto.
She looked me over. No smile now. Eyes medium to hard. Pose very straight and stiff. She waved silver fingernails at the glassed-in shelves.
"What do they look like - grapefruit?" she enquired tartly.
"Oh, that sort of thing hardly interests me, you know. Probably has duplicate sets of steel engravings, tuppence colored and a penny plain. The usual vulgarity. No. I'm sorry. No."
"I see." She tried to jack the smile back up on her face. She was as sore as an alderman with the mumps. "Perhaps Mr. Geiger - but he's not in at the moment."
Her eyes studied me carefully. She knew as much about rare books as I knew about handling a flea circus.
"He might be in later?"
"I'm afraid not until late."
"Too bad," I said. "Ah, too bad. I'll sit down and smoke a cigarette in one of these charming chairs. I have rather a blank afternoon. Nothing to think about but my trigonometry lesson."
"Yes," she said. "Ye-es, of course."
I stretched out in one and lit a cigarette with the round nickel lighter on the smoking stand. She still stood, holding her lower lip with her teeth, her eyes vaguely troubled. She nodded at last, turned slowly and walked back to her little desk in the corner. From behind the lamp she stared at me. I crossed my ankles and yawned. Her silver nails went out to the cradle phone on the desk, didn't touch it, dropped and began to tap on the desk.
Silence for about five minutes. The door opened and a tall hungry-looking bird with a cane and a big nose came in neatly, shut the door behind him against the pressure of the door closer, marched over to the corner and placed a wrapped parcel on the desk. He took a pinseal wallet with gold corners from his pocket and showed the blonde something. She pressed a button on the desk. The tall bird went to the door in the paneled partition and opened it barely enough to slip through.
I finished my cigarette and lit another. The minutes dragged by. Horns tooted and grunted on the boulevard. A big red interurban car grumbled past A traffic light gonged. The blonde leaned on her elbow and cupped a hand over her eyes and stared at me behind it. The partition door opened and the tall bird with the cane slid out. He had another wrapped parcel, the shape of a large book. He went over to the desk and paid money. He left as he had come, walking on the balls of his feet, breathing with his mouth open, giving me a sharp side glance as he passed.
I got to my feet, tipped my hat to the blonde and went out after him. He walked west, swinging his cane in a small tight arc just above his right shoe. He was easy to follow. His coat was cut from a rather loud piece of horse robe with shoulders so wide that his neck stuck up out of it like a celery stalk and his head wobbled on it as he walked. We went a block and a half. At the Highland Avenue traffic signal I pulled up beside him and let him see me. He gave me a casual, then a suddenly sharpened side glance, and quickly turned away. We crossed Highland with the green light and made another block. He stretched his long legs and had twenty yards on me at the corner. He turned right. A hundred feet up the hill he stopped and hooked his cane over his arm and fumbled a leather cigarette case out of an inner pocket. He put a cigarette in his mouth, dropped his match, looked back when he picked it up, saw me watching him from the corner, and straightened up as if somebody had booted him from behind. He almost raised dust going up the block, walking with long gawky strides and jabbing his cane into the side-walk. He turned left again. He had at least half a block on me when I reached the place where he had turned. He had me wheezing. This was a narrow tree-lined street with a retaining wall on one side and three bungalow courts on the other.
He was gone. I loafed along the block peering this way and that. At the second bungalow court I saw something. It was called "The La Baba," a quiet dim place with a double row of tree-shaded bungalows. The central walk was lined with Italian cypresses trimmed short and chunky, something the shape of the oil jars in Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves. Behind the third jar a loud-patterned sleeve edge moved.
I leaned against a pepper tree in the parkway and waited. The thunder in the foothills was rumbling again. The glare of lightning was reflected on piled-up black clouds off to the south. A few tentative raindrops splashed down on the side-walk and made spots as large as nickels. The air was as still as the air in General Sternwood's orchid house.
The sleeve behind the tree showed again, then a big nose and one eye and some sandy hair without a hat on It. The eye stared at me. It disappeared. Its mate reappeared like a woodpecker on the other side of the tree. Five minutes went by. It got him. His type are half nerves. I heard a match strike and then whistling started. Then a dim shadow slipped along the grass to the next tree. Then he was out on the walk coming straight towards me, swinging the cane and whistling. A sour whistle with jitters in it. I stared vaguely up at the dark sky. He passed within ten feet of me and didn't give me a glance. He was safe now. He had ditched it.
I watched him out of sight and went up the central walk of the La Baba and parted the branches of the third cypress. I drew out a wrapped book and put it under my arm and went away from there. Nobody yelled at me.
Back on the boulevard I went into a drugstore phone booth and looked up Mr. Arthur Gwynn Geiger's residence. He lived on Laverne Terrace, a hillside street off Laurel Canyon Boulevard. I dropped my nickel and dialed his number just for fun. Nobody answered. I turned to the classified section and noted a couple of bookstores within blocks of where I was.
The first I came to was on the north side, a large lower floor devoted to stationery and office supplies, a mass of books on the mezzanine. It didn't look the right place. I crossed the street and walked two blocks east to the other one. This was more like it, a narrowed cluttered little shop stacked with books from floor to ceiling and four or five browsers taking their time putting thumb marks on the new jackets. Nobody paid any attention to them. I shoved on back into the store, passed through a partition and found a small dark woman reading a law book at a desk.
I flipped my wallet open on her desk and let her look at the buzzer pinned to the flap. She looked at it, took her glasses off and leaned back in her chair. I put the wallet away. She had the fine-drawn face of an intelligent Jewess. She stared at me and said nothing.
I said: "Would you do me a favor, a very small favor?"
"I don't know. What is it?" She had a smoothly husky voice.
"You know Geiger's store across the street, two blocks west?"
"I think I may have passed it."
"It's a bookstore," I said. "Not your kind of a bookstore. You know darn well."
She curled her lip slightly and said nothing.
"You know Geiger by sight?" I asked.
"I'm sorry. I don't know Mr. Geiger."
"Then you couldn't tell me what he looks like?"
Her lip curled some more.
"Why should I?"
"No reason at all. If you don't want to, I can't make you."
She looked out through the partition door and leaned back again.
"That was a sheriff's star, wasn't it?"
"Honorary deputy. Doesn't mean a thing. It's worth a dime cigar."
"I see." She reached for a pack of cigarettes and shook one loose and reached for it with her lips. I held a match for her. She thanked me, leaned back again and regarded me through smoke. She said carefully:
"You wish to know what he looks like and you don't want to interview him?"
"He's not there," I said.
"I presume he will be. After all, it's his store."
"I don't want to interview him just yet," I said.
She looked out through the open doorway again.
I said: "Know anything about rare books?"
"You could try me."
"Would you have a Ben Hur, 1860, Third Edition, the one with the duplicated line on page 116?"
She pushed her yellow law book to one side and reached a fat volume up on the desk, leafed it through, found her page, and studied it.
"Nobody would," she said without looking up. "There isn't one."
"Right."
"What in the world are you driving at?"
"The girl in Geiger's store didn't know that."
She looked up.
"I see. You interest me. Rather vaguely."
"I'm a private dick on a case. Perhaps I ask too much. It didn't seem much to me somehow."
She blew a soft gray smoke ring and poked her finger through. It came to pieces in frail wisps. She spoke smoothly, indifferently.
"In his early forties, I should judge. Medium height, fattish. Would weigh about a hundred and sixty pounds. Fat face, Charlie Chan moustache, thick soft neck. Soft all over. Well dressed, goes without a hat, affects a knowledge of antiques and hasn't any. Oh yes. His left eye is glass."
"You'd make a good cop," I said.
She put the reference book back on an open shelf at the end of her desk, and opened the law book in front of her again.
"I hope not," she said. She put her glasses on.
I thanked her and left. The rain had started. I ran for it, with the wrapped book under my arm. My car was on a side street pointing at the boulevard almost opposite Geiger's store. I was well sprinkled before I got there. I tumbled into the car and ran both windows up and wiped my parcel off with my handkerchief. Then I opened it up.
I knew about what it would be, of course. A heavy book, well bound, handsomely printed in handset type on fine paper. Larded with full-page arty photographs. Photos and letterpress were alike of an indescribable filth. The book was not new. Dates were stamped on the front endpaper, in and out dates. A rent book. A lending library of elaborate smut.
I rewrapped the book and locked it up behind the seat. A racket like that, out in the open on the bouleyard, seemed to mean plenty of protection. I sat there and poisoned myself with cigarette smoke and listened to the rain and thought about it.
Rain filled the gutters and splashed knee-high off the sidewalk. Big cops in slickers that shone like gun barrels had a lot of fun carrying giggling girls across the bad places. The rain drummed hard on the roof of the car and the burbank top began to leak. A pool of water formed on the floorboards for me to keep my feet in. It was too early in the fall for that kind of rain. I struggled into a trench coat and made a dash for the nearest drugstore and bought myself a pint of whiskey. Back in the car I used enough of it to keep warm and interested. I was long overparked, but the cops were too busy carrying girls and blowing whistles to bother about that.
In spite of the rain, or perhaps even because of it, there was business down at Geiger's. Very nice cars stopped in front and very nice-looking people went in and out with wrapped parcels. They were not all men.
He showed about four o'clock. A cream-colored coupe stopped in front of the store and I caught a glimpse of the fat face and the Charlie Chan moustache as he dodged out of it and into the store. He was hatless and wore a belted green leather raincoat. I couldn't see his glass eye at that distance. A tall and very good-looking kid in a jerkin came out of the store and rode the coupe off around the corner and came back walking, his glistening black hair plastered with rain.
Another hour went by. It got dark and the rain-clouded lights of the stores were soaked up by the black street. Streetcar bells jangled crossly. At around five-fifteen the tall boy in the jerkin came out of Geiger's with an umbrella and went after the cream colored coupe. When he had it in front Geiger came out and the tall boy held the umbrella over Geiger's bare head. He folded it, shook it off and handed it into the car. He dashed back into the store. I started my motor.
The coupe went west on the boulevard, which forced me to make a left turn and a lot of enemies, including a motorman who stuck his head out into the rain to bawl me out. I was two blocks behind the coupe before I got in the groove. I hoped Geiger was on his way home. I caught sight of him two or three times and then made him turning north into Laurel Canyon Drive. Halfway up the grade he turned left and took a curving ribbon of wet concrete which was called Laverne Terrace. It was a narrow street with a high bank on one side and a scattering of cabin-like houses built down the slope on the other side, so that their roofs were not very much above road level. Their front windows were masked by hedges and shrubs. Sodden trees dripped all over the landscape.
Geiger had his lights on and I hadn't. I speeded up and passed him on a curve, picked a number off a house as I went by and turned at the end of the block. He had already stopped. His car lights were tilted in at the garage of a small house with a square box hedge so arranged that it masked the front door completely. I watched him come out of the garage with his umbrella up and go in through the hedge. He didn't act as if he expected anybody to be tailing him. Light went on in the house. I drifted down to the next house above it, which seemed empty but had no signs out. I parked, aired out the convertible, had a drink from my bottle, and sat. I didn't know what I was waiting for, but something told me to wait. Another army of sluggish minutes dragged by.
Two cars came up the hill and went over the crest. It seemed to be a very quiet street. At a little after six more bright lights bobbed through the driving rain. It was pitch black by then. A car dragged to a stop in front of Geiger's house. The filaments of its lights glowed dimly and died. The door opened and a woman got out. A small slim woman in a vagabond hat and a transparent raincoat. She went in through the box maze. A bell rang faintly, light through the rain, a closing door, silence.
I reached a flask out of my car pocket and went downgrade and looked at the car. It was a Packard convertible, maroon or dark brown. The left window was down. I felt for the license holder and poked light at it. The registration read: Carmen Sternwood, 3765 Alta Brea Crescent, West Hollywood. I went back to my car again and sat and sat. The top dripped on my knees and my stomach burned from the whiskey. No more cars came up the hill. No lights went on in the house before which I was parked. It seemed like a nice neighborhood to have bad habits in.
At seven-twenty a single flash of hard white light shot out of Geiger's house like a wave of summer lightning. As the darkness folded back on it and ate it up a thin tinkling scream echoed out and lost itself among the rain-drenched trees. I was out of the car and on my way before the echoes died.
There was no fear in the scream. It had a sound of half-pleasurable shock, an accent of drunkenness, an overtone of pure idiocy. It was a nasty sound. It made me think of men in white and barred windows and hard narrow cots with leather wrist and ankle straps fastened to them. The Geiger hideaway was perfectly silent again when I hit the gap in the hedge and dodged around the angle that masked the front door. There was an iron ring in a lion's mouth for a knocker.
I reached for it, I had hold of it. At that exact instant, as if somebody had been waiting for the cue, three shots boomed in the house. There was a sound that might have been a long harsh sigh. Then a soft messy thump. And then rapid footsteps in the house - going away.
The door fronted on a narrow run, like a footbridge over a gully, that filled the gap between the house wall and the edge of the bank. There was no porch, no solid ground, no way to get around to the back. The back entrance was at the top of a flight of wooden steps that rose from the alley-like street below. I knew this because I heard a clatter of feet on the steps, going down. Then I heard the sudden roar of a starting car. It faded swiftly into the distance. I thought the sound was echoed by another car, but I wasn't sure. The house in front of me was as silent as a vault. There wasn't any hurry. What was in there was in there.
I straddled the fence at the side of the runway and leaned far out to the draped but unscreened French window and tried to look in at the crack where the drapes came together. I saw lamplight on a wall and one end of a bookcase. I got back on the runway and took all of it and some of the hedge and gave the front door the heavy shoulder. This was foolish. About the only part of a California house you can't put your foot through is the front door. All it did was hurt my shoulder and make me mad. I climbed over the railing again and kicked the French window in, used my hat for a glove and pulled out most of the lower small pane of glass. I could now reach in and draw a bolt that fastened the window to the sill. The rest was easy. There was no top bolt. The catch gave. I climbed in and pulled the drapes off my face. Neither of the two people in the room paid any attention to the way I came in, although only one of them was dead.
It was a wide room, the whole width of the house, It had a low beamed ceiling and brown plaster walls decked out with strips of Chinese embroidery and Chinese and Japanese prints in grained wood frames. There were low bookshelves, there was a thick pinkish Chinese rug in which a gopher could have spent a week without showing his nose above the nap. There were floor cushions, bits of odd silk tossed around, as if whoever lived there had to have a piece he could reach out and thumb. There was a broad low divan of old rose tapestry. It had a wad of clothes on it, including lilac-colored silk underwear. There was a big carved lamp on a pedestal, two other standing lamps with jade-green shades and long tassels. There was a black desk with carved gargoyles at the corners and behind it a yellow satin cushion on a polished black chair with carved arms and back. The room contained an odd assortment of odors, of which the most emphatic at the moment seemed to be the pungent aftermath of cordite and the sickish aroma of ether.
On a sort of low dais at one end of the room there was a high-backed teakwood chair in which Miss Carmen Sternwood was sitting on a fringed orange shawl. She was sitting very straight, with her hands on the arms of the chair, her knees close together, her body stiffly erect in the pose of an Egyptian goddess, her chin level, her small bright teeth shining between her parted lips. Her eyes were wide open. The dark slate color of the iris had devoured the pupil. They were mad eyes. She seemed to be unconscious, but she didn't have the pose of unconsciousness. She looked as if, in her mind, she was doing something very important and making a fine job of it. Out of her mouth came a tinny chuckling noise which didn't change her expression or even move her lips.
She was wearing a pair of long jade earrings. They were nice earrings and had probably cost a couple of hundred dollars. She wasn't wearing anything else.
She had a beautiful body, small, lithe, compact, firm, rounded. Her skin in the lamplight had the shimmering luster of a pearl. Her legs didn't quite have the raffish grace of Mrs. Regan's legs, but they were very nice. I looked her over without either embarrassment or ruttishness. As a naked girl she was not there in that room at all. She was just a dope. To me she was always just a dope.
I stopped looking at her and looked at Geiger. He was on his back on the floor, beyond the fringe of the Chinese rug, in front of a thing that looked like a totem pole. It had a profile like an eagle and its wide round eye was a camera lens. The lens was aimed at the naked girl in the chair. There was a blackened flash bulb clipped to the side of the totem pole. Geiger was wearing Chinese slippers with thick felt soles, and his legs were in black satin pajamas and the upper part of him wore a Chinese embroidered coat, the front of which was mostly blood. His glass eye shone brightly up at me and was by far the most lifelike thing about him. At a glance none of the three shots I heard had missed. He was very dead.
The flash bulb was the sheet lightning I had seen. The crazy scream was the doped and naked girl's reaction to it. The three shots had been somebody else's idea of how the proceedings might be given a new twist. The idea of the lad who had gone down the back steps and slammed into a car and raced away. I could see merit in his point of view.
A couple of fragile gold-veined glasses rested on a red lacquer tray on the end of the black desk, beside a pot-bellied flagon of brown liquid. I took the stopper out and sniffed at it. It smelled of ether and something else, possibly laudanum. I had never tried the mixtare but it seemed to go pretty well with the Geiger menage.
I listened to the rain hitting the roof and the north windows. Beyond was no other sound, no cars, no siren, just the rain beating. I went over to the divan and peeled off my trench coat and pawed through the girl's clothes. There was a pale green rough wool dress of the pull-on type, with half sleeves. I thought I might be able to handle it. I decided to pass up her underclothes, not from feelings of delicacy, but because I couldn't see myself putting her pants on and snapping her brassiere. I took the dress over to the teak chair on the dais. Miss Sternwood smelled of ether also, at a distance of several feet. The tinny chuckling noise was still coming from her and a little froth oozed down her chin. I slapped her face. She blinked and stopped chuckling. I slapped her again.
"Come on," I said brightly. "Let's be nice. Let's get dressed."
She peered at me, her slaty eyes as empty as holes in a mask. "Gugutoterell," she said.
I slapped her around a little more. She didn't mind the slaps. They didn't bring her out of it. I set to work with the dress. She didn't mind that either. She let me hold her arms up and she spread her fingers out wide, as if that was cute. I got her hands through the sleeves, pulled the dress down over her back, and stood her up. She fell into my arms giggling. I set her back in the chair and got her stockings and shoes on her.
"Let's take a little walk," I said. "Let's take a nice little walk."
We took a little walk. Part of the time her earrings banged against my chest and part of the time we did the splits in unison, like adagio dancers. We walked over to Geiger's body and back. I had her look at him. She thought he was cute. She giggled and tried to tell me so, but she just bubbled. I walked her over to the divan and spread her out on it. She hiccuped twice, giggled a little and went to sleep. I stuffed her belongings into my pockets and went over behind the totem pole thing. The camera was there all right, set inside it, but there was no plateholder in the camera. I looked around on the floor, thinking he might have got it out before he was shot. No plateholder. I took hold of his limp chilling hand and rolled him a little. No plateholder. I didn't like this development.
I went into a hall at the back of the room and investigated the house. There was a bathroom on the right and a locked door, a kitchen at the back. The kitchen window had been jimmied. The screen was gone and the place where the hook had pulled out showed on the sill. The back door was unlocked. I left it unlocked and looked into a bedroom on the left side of the hall. It was neat, fussy, womanish. The bed had a flounced cover.
There was perfume on the triple-mirrored dressing table, beside a handkerchief, some loose money, a man's brushes, a keyholder. A man's clothes were in the closet and a man's slippers under the flounced edge of the bed cover. Mr. Geiger's room. I took the keyholder back to the living room and went through the desk. There was a locked steel box in the deep drawer. I used one of the keys on it. There was nothing in it but a blue leather book with an index and a lot of writing in code, in the same slanting printing that had written to General Sternwood. I put the notebook in my pocket, wiped the steel box where I had touched it, locked the desk up, pocketed the keys, turned the gas logs off in the fireplace, wrapped myself in my coat and tried to rouse Miss Sternwood. It couldn't be done. I crammed her vagabond hat on her head and swathed her in her coat and carried her out to her car. I went back and put all the lights out and shut the front door, dug her keys out of her bag and started the Packard. We went off down the hill without lights. It was less than ten minutes' drive to Alta Brea Crescent. Carmen spent them snoring and breathing ether in my face. I couldn't keep her head off my shoulder. It was all I could do to keep it out of my lap.
There was dim light behind narrow leaded panes in the side door of the Sternwood mansion. I stopped the Packard under the porte-cochere and emptied my pockets out on the seat. The girl snored in the corner, her hat tilted rakishly over her nose, her hands hanging limp in the folds of the raincoat. I got out and rang the bell. Steps came slowly, as if from a long dreary distance. The door opened and the straight, silvery butler looked out at me. The light from the hall made a halo of his hair.
He said: "Good evening, sir," politely and looked past me at the Packard. His eyes came back to look at my eyes.
"Is Mrs. Regan in?"
"No, sir."
"The General is asleep, I hope?"
"Yes. The evening is his best time for sleeping."
"How about Mrs. Regan's maid?"
"Mathilda? She's here, sir."
"Better get her down here. The job needs the woman's touch. Take a look in the car and you'll see why."
He took a look in the car. He came back.
"I see," he said. "I'll get Mathilda."
"Mathilda will do right by her," I said.
"We all try to do right by her," he said.
"I guess you have had practice," I said.
He let that one go.
"Well, good-night," I said. "I'm leaving it in your hands."
"Very good, sir. May I call you a cab?"
"Positively," I said, "not. As a matter of fact I'm not here. You're just seeing things."
He smiled then. He gave me a duck of his head and I turned and walked down the driveway and out of the gates.
Ten blocks of that, winding down curved rain-swept streets, under the steady drip of trees, past lighted windows in big houses in ghostly enormous grounds, vague clusters of eaves and gables and lighted windows high on the hillside, remote and inaccessible, like witch houses in a forest. I came out at a service station glaring with wasted light, where a bored attendant in a white cap and a dark blue windbreaker sat hunched on a stool, inside the steamed glass, reading a paper. I started in, then kept going. I was as wet as I could get already. And on a night like that you can grow a beard waiting for a taxi. And taxi drivers remember.
I made it back to Geiger's house in something over half an hour of nimble walking. There was nobody there, no car on the street except my own car in front of the next house. It looked as dismal as a lost dog. I dug my bottle of rye out of it and poured half of what was left down my throat and got inside to light a cigarette. I smoked half of it, threw it away, got out again and went down to Geiger's. I unlocked the door and stepped into the still warm darkness and stood there, dripping quietly on the floor and listening to the rain. I groped to a lamp and lit it.
The first thing I noticed was that a couple of strips of embroidered silk were gone from the wall. I hadn't counted them, but the spaces of brown plaster stood out naked and obvious. I went a little farther and put another lamp on. I looked at the totem pole. At its foot, beyond the margin of the Chinese rug, on the bare floor another rug had been spread. It hadn't been there before. Geiger's body had. Geiger's body was gone.
That froze me. I pulled my lips back against my teeth and leered at the glass eye in the totem pole. I went through the house again. Everything was exactly as it had been. Geiger wasn't in his flounced bed or under it or in his closet. He wasn't in the kitchen or the bathroom. That left the locked door on the right of the hall. One of Geiger's keys fitted the lock. The room inside was interesting, but Geiger wasn't in it. It was interesting because it was so different from Geiger's room. It was a hard bare masculine bedroom with a polished wood floor, a couple of small throw rugs in an Indian design, two straight chairs, a bureau in dark grained wood with a man's toilet set and two black candles in foot-high brass candlesticks. The bed was narrow and looked hard and had a maroon batik cover. The room felt cold. I locked it up again, wiped the knob off with my handkerchief, and went back to the totem pole. I knelt down and squinted along the nap of the rug to the front door. I thought I could see two parallel grooves pointing that way, as though heels had dragged. Whoever had done it had meant business. Dead men are heavier than broken hearts.
It wasn't the law. They would have been there still, just about getting warmed up with their pieces of string and chalk and their cameras and dusting powders and their nickel cigars. They would have been very much there. It wasn't the killer. He had left too fast. He must have seen the girl. He couldn't be sure she was too batty to see him. He would be on his way to distant places. I couldn't guess the answer, but it was all right with me if somebody wanted Geiger missing instead of just murdered. It gave me a chance to find out if I could tell it leaving Carmen Sternwood out.
I locked up again, choked my car to life and rode off home to a shower, dry clothes and a late dinner. After that I sat around in the apartment and drank too much hot toddy trying to crack the code in Geiger's blue indexed notebook. All I could be sure of was that it was a list of names and addresses, probably of the customers. There were over four hundred of them. That made it a nice racket, not to mention any blackmail angles, and there were probably plenty of those. Any name on the list might be a prospect as the killer. I didn't envy the police their job when it was handed to them.
I went to bed full of whiskey and frustration and dreamed about a man in a bloody Chinese coat who chased a naked girl with long jade earrings while I ran after them and tried to take a photograph with an empty camera.
The next morning was bright, clear and sunny. I woke up with a motorman's glove in my mouth, drank two cups of coffee and went through the morning papers. I didn't find any reference to Mr. Arthur Gwynn Geiger in either of them. I was shaking the wrinkles out of my damp suit when the phone rang. It was Bernie Ohls, the D.A.'s chief investigator, who had given me the lead to General Sternwood.
"Well, how's the boy?" he began. He sounded like a man who had slept well and didn't owe too much money.
"I've got a hangover," I said.
"Tsk, tsk." He laughed absently and then his voice became a shade too casual, a cagey cop voice. "Seen General Sternwood yet?"
"Uh-huh."
"Done anything for him?"
"Too much rain," I answered, if that was an answer.
"They seem to be a family things happen to. A big Buick belonging to one of them is washing about in the surf off Lido fish pier."
I held the telephone tight enough to crack it. I also held my breath.
"Yeah," Ohls said cheerfully. "A nice new Buick sedan all messed up with sand and sea water ... Oh, I almost forgot. There's a guy inside it."
I let my breath out so slowly that it hung on my lip.
"Regan?" I asked.
"Huh? Who? Oh, you mean the ex-legger the eldest girl picked up and went and married. I never saw him. What would he be doing down there?"
"Quit stalling. What would anybody be doing down there?"
"I don't know, pal. I'm dropping down to look see. Want to go along?"
"Yes."
"Snap it up," he said. "I'll be in my hutch."
Shaved, dressed and lightly breakfasted I was at the Hall of Justice in less than an hour. I rode up to the seventh floor and went along to the group of small offices used by the D.A.'s men. Ohls' was no larger than the others, but he had it to himself. There was nothing on his desk but a blotter, a cheap pen set, his hat and one of his feet. He was a medium-sized blondish man with stiff white eyebrows, calm eyes and well-kept teeth. He looked like anybody you would pass on the street. I happened to know he had killed nine men-three of them when he was covered, or somebody thought he was.
He stood up and pocketed a flat tin of toy cigars called Entractes, jiggled the one in his mouth up and down and looked at me carefully along his nose, with his head thrown back.
"It's not Regan," he said. "I checked. Regan's a big guy, as tail as you and a shade heavier. This is a young kid."
I didn't say anything.
"What made Regan skip out?" Ohls asked. "You interested in that?"
"I don't think so," I said.
"When a guy out of the liquor traffic marries into a rich family and then waves good-by to a pretty dame and a couple million legitimate bucks - that's enough to make even me think. I guess you thought that was a secret."
"Uh-huh."
"Okey, keep buttoned, kid. No hard feelings." He came around the desk tapping his pockets and reaching for his hat.
"I'm not looking for Regan," I said.
He fixed the lock on his door and we went down to the official parking lot and got into a small blue sedan. We drove out Sunset, using the siren once in a while to beat a signal. It was a crisp morning, with just enough snap in the air to make life seem simple and sweet, if you didn't have too much on your mind. I had.
It was thirty miles to Lido on the coast highway, the first ten of them through traffic. Ohls made the run in three quarters of an hour. At the end of that time we skidded to a stop in front of a faded stucco arch and I took my feet out of the floorboards and we got out. A long pier railed with white two-by-fours stretched seaward from the arch. A knot of people leaned out at the far end and a motorcycle officer stood under the arch keeping another group of people from going out on the pier. Cars were parked on both sides of the highway, the usual ghouls, of both sexes.
Ohls showed the motorcycle officer his badge and we went out on the pier, into a loud fish smell which one night's hard rain hadn't even dented.
"There she is - on the power barge," Ohls said, pointing with one of his toy cigars.
A low black barge with a wheelhouse like a tug's was crouched against the pilings at the end of the pier. Something that glistened in the morning sunlight was on its deck, with hoist chains still around it, a large black and chromium car. The arm of the hoist had been swung back into position and lowered to deck level. Men stood around the car. We went down slippery steps to the deck.
Ohls said hello to a deputy in green khaki and a man in plain clothes. The barge crew of three men leaned against the front of the wheelhouse and chewed tobacco. One of them was rubbing at his wet hair with a dirty bath-towel. That would be the man who had gone down into the water to put the chains on.
We looked the car over. The front bumper was bent, one headlight smashed, the other bent up but the glass still unbroken. The radiator shell had a big dent in it, and the paint and nickel were scratched up all over the car. The upholstery was sodden and black. None of the tires seemed to be damaged.
The driver was still draped around the steering post with his head at an unnatural angle to his shoulders. He was a slim dark-haired kid who had been good-looking not so long ago. Now his face was bluish white and his eyes were a faint dull gleam under the lowered lids and his open-mouth had sand in it. On the left side of his forehead there was a dull bruise that stood out against the whiteness of the skin.
Ohls backed away, made a noise in his throat and put a match to his little cigar.
"What's the story?"
The uniformed man pointed up at the rubbernecks on the end of the pier. One of them was fingering a place where the white two-by-fours had been broken through in a wide space. The splintered wood showed yellow and clean, like fresh-cut pine.
"Went through there. Must have hit pretty hard. The rain stopped early down here, around nine p.m. The broken wood's dry inside. That puts it after the rain stopped. She fell in plenty of water not to be banged up worse, not more than half tide or she'd have drifted farther, and not more than half tide going out or she'd have crowded the piles. That makes it around ten last night. Maybe nine-thirty, not earlier. She shows under the water when the boys come down to fish this morning, so we get the barge to hoist her out and we find the dead guy."
The plainclothesman scuffed at the deck with the toe of his shoe. Ohls looked sideways along his eyes at me, and twitched his little cigar like a cigarette.
"Drunk?" he asked, of nobody in particular.
The man who had been toweling his head went over to the rail and cleared his throat in a loud hawk that made everybody look at him.
"Got some sand," he said, and spat. "Not as much as the boy friend got - but some."
The uniformed man said: "Could have been drunk. Showing off all alone in the rain. Drunks will do anything."
"Drunk, hell," the plainclothesman said. "The hand throttle's set halfway down and the guy's been sapped on the side of the head. Ask me and I'll call it murder."
Ohls looked at the man with the towel.
"What do you think, buddy?"
The man with the towel looked flattered. He grinned.
"I say suicide, Mac. None of my business, but you ask me, I say suicide. First off the guy plowed an awful straight furrow down that pier. You can read his tread marks all the way nearly. That puts it after the rain like the Sheriff said. Then he hit the pier hard and clean or he don't go through and land right side up. More likely turned over a couple of times. So he had plenty of speed and hit the rail square. That's more than half-throttle. He could have done that with his hand falling and he could have hurt his head falling too."
Ohls said: "You got eyes, buddy. Frisked him?" he asked the deputy. The deputy looked at me, then at the crew against the wheelhouse. "Okey, save that," Ohls said.
A small man with glasses and a tired face and a black bag came down the steps from the pier. He picked out a fairly clean spot on the deck and put the bag down. Then he took his hat off and rubbed the back of his neck and stared out to sea, as if he didn't know where he was or what he had come for.
Ohls said: "There's your customer, Doc. Dove off the pier last night. Around nine to ten. That's all we know."
The small man looked in at the dead man morosely. He fingered the head, peered at the bruise on the temple, moved the head around with both hands, felt the man's ribs. He lifted a lax dead hand and stared at the fingernails. He let it fall and watched it fall. He stepped back and opened his bag and took out a printed pad of D.O.A. forms and began to write over a carbon.
"Broken neck's the apparent cause of death," he said, writing. "Which means there won't be much water in him. Which means he's due to start getting stiff pretty quick now he's out in the air. Better get him out of the car before he does. You won't like doing it after."
Ohls nodded.
"How long dead, Doc?"
"I wouldn't know."
Ohls looked at him sharply and took the little cigar out of his mouth and looked at that sharply.
"Pleased to know you, Doc. A coroner's man that can't guess within five minutes has me beat."
The little man grinned sourly and put his pad in his bag and clipped his pencil back on his vest.
"If he ate dinner last night, I'll tell you - if I know what time he ate it. But not within five minutes."
"How would he get that bruise-falling?"
The little man looked at the bruise again.
"I don't think so. That blow came from something covered. And it had already bled subcutaneously while he was alive."
"Blackjack, huh?"
"Very likely." The little M.E.'s man nodded, picked his bag off deck and went back up the steps to the pier. An ambulance was backing into position outside the stucco arch.
Ohls looked at me and said:
"Let's go. Hardly worth the ride, was it?"
We went back along the pier and got into Ohls' sedan again. He wrestled it around on the highway and drove back towards town along a three-lane highway washed clean by the rain, past low rolling hills of yellow-white sand terraced with pink moss. Seaward a few gulls wheeled and swooped over something in the surf and far out a white yacht looked as if it was hanging in the sky.
Ohls cocked his chin at me and said:
"Know him?"
"Sure. The Sternwood chauffeur. I saw him dusting that very car out there yesterday."
"I don't want to crowd you, Marlowe. Just tell me, did the job have anything to do with him?"
"No. I don't even know his name."
"Owen Taylor. How do I know? Funny about that. About a year or so back we had him in the cooler on a Mann Act rap. It seems he run Sternwood's hotcha daughter, the young one, off to Yuma. The sister ran after them and brought them back and had Owen heaved into the icebox. Then next day she comes down to the D.A. and gets him to beg the kid off with the U. S. cutor. She says the kid meant to marry her sister and wanted to, only the sister can't see it. All she wanted was to kick a few high ones off the bar and have herself a party. So we let the kid go and then darned if they don't have him come back to work. And a little later we get the routine report on his prints from Washington, and he's got a prior back in Indiana, attempted hold-up six years ago. He got off with a six months in the county jail, the very one Dillinger bust out of. We hand that to the Sternwoods and they keep him on just the same. What do you think of that?"
"They seem to be a screwy family," I said. "Do they know about last night?"
"No. I gotta go up against them now."
"Leave the old man out of it, if you can."
"Why?"
"He has enough troubles and he's sick."
"You mean Regan?"
I scowled.
"I don't know anything about Regan, I told you. I'm not looking for Regan. Regan hasn't bothered anybody that I know of."
Ohls said: "Oh," and stared thoughtfully out to sea and the sedan nearly went off the road. For the rest of the drive back to town he hardly spoke. He dropped me off in Hollywood near the Chinese Theater and turned back west to Alta Brea Crescent. I ate lunch at a counter and looked at an afternoon paper and couldn't find anything about Geiger in it.
After lunch I walked east on the boulevard to have another look at Geiger's store.
The lean black-eyed credit jeweler was standing in his entrance in the same position as the afternoon before. He gave me the same knowing look as I turned in. The store looked just the same. The same lamp glowed on the small desk in the corner and the same ash blonde in the same black suede-like dress got up from behind it and came towards me with the same tentative smile on her face.
"Was it - ?" she said and stopped. Her silver nails twitched at her side. There was an overtone of strain in her smile. It wasn't a smile at all. It was a grimace. She just thought it was a smile.
"Back again," I chirped airily, and waved a cigarette. "Mr. Geiger in today?"
"I'm - I'm afraid not. No - I'm afraid not. Let me see - you wanted..."
I took my dark glasses off and tapped them delicately on the inside of my left wrist. If you can weigh a hundred and ninety pounds and look like a fairy, I was doing my best.
"That was just a stall about those first editions," I whispered. "I have to be careful. I've got something he'll want. Something he's wanted for a long time."
The silver fingernails touched the blond hair over one small jet-buttoned ear.
"Oh, a salesman," she said. "Well - you might come in tomorrow. I think he'll be here tomorrow."
"Drop the veil," I said. "I'm in the business too."
Her eyes narrowed until they were a faint greenish glitter, like a forest pool far back in the shadow of trees. Her fingers clawed at her palm. She stared at me and chopped off a breath.
"Is he sick? I could go up to the house," I said impatiently, "I haven't got forever."
"You-a-you-a-" her throat jammed. I thought she was going to fall on her nose. Her whole body shivered and her face fell apart like a bride's pie crust. She put it together again slowly, as if lifting a great weight, by sheer will power. The smile came back, with a couple of corners badly bent.
"No," she breathed. "No. He's out of town. That-wouldn't be any use. Can't you - come in - tomorrow?"
I had my mouth open to say something when the partition door opened a foot. The tall dark handsome boy in the jerkin looked out, pale-faced and tightlipped, saw me, shut the door quickly again, but not before I had seen on the floor behind him a lot of wooden boxes lined with newspapers and packed loosely with books. A man in very new overalls was fussing with them. Some of Geiger's stock was being moved out.
When the door shut I put my dark glasses on again and touched my hat.
"Tomorrow, then. I'd like to give you a card, but you know how it is."
"Ye-es. I know how it is." She shivered a little more and made a faint sucking noise between her bright lips.
I went out of the store and west on the boulevard to the corner and north on the street to the alley which ran behind the stores. A small black truck with wire sides and no lettering on it was backed up to Geiger's place. The man in the very new overalls was just heaving a box up on the tailboard. I went back to the boulevard and along the block next to Geiger's and found a taxi standing at a fireplug. A fresh-faced kid was reading a horror magazine behind the wheel. I leaned in and showed him a dollar:
"Tail job?"
He looked me over.
"Cop?"
"Private."
He grinned. "My meat, Jack." He tucked the magazine over his rear view mirror and I got into the cab. We went around the block and pulled up across from Geiger's alley, beside another fireplug.
There were about a dozen boxes on the truck when the man in overalls closed the screened doors and hooked the tailboard up and got in behind the wheel.
"Take him," I told my driver.
The man in overalls gunned his motor, shot a glance up and down the alley and ran away fast in the other direction. He turned left out of the alley. We did the same. I caught a glimpse of the truck turning east on Franklin and told my driver to close in a little. He didn't or couldn't do it. I saw the truck two blocks away when we got to Franklin. We had it in sight to Vine and across Vine and all the way to Western. We saw it twice after Western. There was a lot of traffic and the freshfaced kid tailed from too far back. I was telling him about that without mincing words when the truck, now far ahead, turned north again. The street at which it turned was called Brittany Place. When we got to Brittany Place the truck had vanished.
The fresh-faced kid made comforting sounds at me through the panel and we went up the hill at four miles an hour looking for the truck behind bushes. Two blocks up, Brittany Place swung to the east and met Randall Place in a tongue of land on which there was a white apartment house with its front on Randall Place and its basement garage opening on Brittany. We were going past that and the fresh-faced kid was telling me the truck couldn't be far away when I looked through the arched entrance of the garage and saw it back in the dimness with its rear doors open again.
We went around to the front of the apartment house and I got out. There was nobody in the lobby, no switchboard. A wooden desk was pushed back against the wall beside a panel of gilt mailboxes. I looked the names over. A man named Joseph Brody had Apartment 405. A man named Joe Brody had received five thousand dollars from General Sternwood to stop playing with Carmen and find some other little girl to play with. It could be the same Joe Brody. I felt like giving odds on it.
I went around an elbow of wall to the foot of tiled stairs and the shaft of the automatic elevator. The top of the elevator was level with the floor. There was a door beside the shaft lettered "Garage." I opened it and went down narrow steps to the basement. The automatic elevator was propped open and the man in new overalls was grunting hard as he stacked heavy boxes in it. I stood beside him and lit a cigarette and watched him. He didn't like my watching him.
After a while I said:
"Watch the weight, bud. She's only tested for half a ton. Where's the stuff going?"
"Brody, four-o-five," he grunted. "Manager?"
"Yeah. Looks like a nice lot of loot."
He glared at me with pale white rimmed eyes.
"Books," he snarled. "A hundred pounds a box, easy, and me with a seventy-five pound back."
"Well, watch the weight," I said.
He got into the elevator with six boxes and shut the doors. I went back up the steps to the lobby and out to the street and the cab took me downtown again to my office building. I gave the fresh-faced kid too much money and he gave me a dog-eared business card which for once I didn't drop into the majolica jar of sand beside the elevator bank.
I had a room and a half on the seventh floor at the back. The half-room was an office split in two to make reception rooms. Mine had my name on it and nothing else, and that only on the reception room. I always left this unlocked, in case I had a client, and the client cared to sit down and wait.
I had a client.
She wore brownish speckled tweeds, a mannish shirt and tie, handcarved walking shoes. Her stockings were just as sheer as the day before, but she wasn't showing as much of her legs. Her black hair was glossy under a brown Robin Hood hat that might have cost fifty dollars and looked as if you could have made it with one hand out of a desk blotter.
"Well, you do get up," she said, wrinkling her nose at the faded red settee, the two odd semi-easy chairs, the net curtains that needed laundering and the boy's size library table with the venerable magazines on it to give the place a professional touch. "I was beginning to think perhaps you worked in bed, like Marcel Proust."
"Who's he?" I put a cigarette in my mouth and stared at her. She looked a little pale and strained, but she looked like a girl who could function under a strain.
"A French writer, a connoisseur in degenerates. You wouldn't know him."
"Tut, tut," I said. "Come into my boudoir."
She stood up and said:
"We didn't get along very well yesterday. Perhaps I was rude."
"We were both rude," I said.
I unlocked the communicating door and held it for her. We went into the rest of my suite, which contained a rust-red carpet, not very young, five green filing cases, three of them full of California climate, an advertising calendar showing the Quints rolling around on a sky-blue floor, in pink dresses, with seal-brown hair and sharp black eyes as large as mammoth prunes. There were three near-walnut chairs, the usual desk with the usual blotter, pen set, ashtray and telephone, and the usual squeaky swivel chair behind it.
"You don't put on much of a front," she said, sitting down at the customer's side of the desk.
I went over to the mail slot and picked up six envelopes, two letters and four pieces of advertising matter. I hung my hat on the telephone and sat down.
"Neither do the Pinkertons," I said. "You can't make much money at this trade, if you're honest. If you have a front, you're making money - or expect to."
"Oh - are you honest?" she asked and opened her bag. She picked a cigarette out of a French enamel case, lit it with a pocket lighter, dropped case and lighter back into the bag and left the bag open.
"Painfully."
"How did you get into this slimy kind of business then?"
"How did you come to marry a bootlegger?"
"My God, let's not start quarreling again. I've been trying to get you on the phone all morning. Here and at your apartment."
"About Owen?"
Her face tightened sharply. Her voice was soft.
"Poor Owen," she said. "So you know about that."
"A D.A.'s man took me down to Lido. He thought I might know something about it. But he knew much more than I did. He knew Owen wanted to marry your sister - once."
She puffed silently at her cigarette and considered me with steady black eyes.
"Perhaps it wouldn't have been a bad idea," she said quietly. "He was in love with her. We don't find much of that in our circle."
"He had a police record."
She shrugged. She said negligently: "He didn't know the right people. That's all a police record means in this rotten crime-ridden country."
"I wouldn't go that far."
She peeled her right glove off and bit her index finger at the first joint, looking at me with steady eyes.
"I didn't come to see you about Owen. Do you feel yet that you can tell me what my father wanted to see you about?"
"Not without his permission."
"Was it about Carmen?"
"I can't even say that." I finished filling a pipe and put a match to it. She watched the smoke for a moment. Then her hand went into her open bag and came out with a thick white envelope. She tossed it across the desk.
"You'd better look at it anyway," she said.
I picked it up. The address was typewritten to Mrs. Vivian Regan, 3765 Alta Brea Crescent, West Hollywood. Delivery had been by messenger service and the office stamp showed 8.35 a.m. as the time out. I opened the envelope and drew out the shiny 4 1/4 by 3 1/4 photo that was all there was inside. It was Carmen sitting in Geiger's high-backed teakwood chair on the dais, in her earrings and her birthday suit. Her eyes looked even a little crazier than as I remembered them. The back of the photo was blank. I put it back in the envelope.
"How much do they want?" I asked.
"Five thousand - for the negative and the rest of the prints. The deal has to be closed tonight, or they give the stuff to some scandal sheet."
"The demand came how?"
"A woman telephoned me, about half an hour after this thing was delivered."
"There's nothing in the scandal sheet angle. Juries convict without leaving the box on that stuff nowadays. What else is there?"
"Does there have to be something else?"
"Yes."
She stared at me, a little puzzled.
"There is. The woman said there was a police jam connected with it and I'd better lay it on the line fast, or I'd be talking to my little sister through a wire screen."
"Better," I said. "What kind of jam?"
"I don't know."
"Where is Carmen now?"
"She's at home. She was sick last night. She's still in bed, I think."
"Did she go out last night?"
"No. I was out, but the servants say she wasn't. I was down at Las Olindas, playing roulette at Eddie Mars' Cypress Club. I lost my shirt."
"So you like roulette. You would."
She crossed her legs and lit another cigarette.
"Yes. I like roulette. All Sternwoods like losing games, like roulette and marrying men that walk out on them and riding steeplechases at fifty-eight years old and being rolled on by a jumper and crippled for life. The Sternwoods have money. All it has bought them is a rain check."
"What was Owen doing last night with your car?"
"Nobody knows. He took it without permission. We always let him take a car on his night off, but last night wasn't his night off."
She made a wry mouth. "Do you think -"
"He knew about this nude photo? How would I be able to say? I don't rule him out. Can you get five thousand in cash right away?"
"Not unless I tell Dad - or borrow it. I could probably borrow it from Eddie Mars. He ought to be generous with me, heaven knows."
"Better try that. You may need it in a hurry."
She leaned back and hung an arm over the back of the chair.
"How about telling the police?"
"It's a good idea. But you won't do it."
"Won't I?"
"No. You have to protect your father and your sister. You don't know what the police might turn up. It might be something they couldn't sit on. Though they usually try in blackmail cases."
"Can you do anything?"
"I think I can. But I can't tell you why or how."
"I like you," she said suddenly. "You believe in miracles. Would you have a drink in the office?"
I unlocked my deep drawer and got out my office bottle and two pony glasses. I filled them and we drank. She snapped her bag shut and pushed the chair back.
"I'll get the five grand," she said. "I've been a good customer of Eddie Mars. There's another reason why he should be nice to me, which you may not know." She gave me one of those smiles the lips have forgotten before they reach the eyes. "Eddie's blonde wife is the lady Rusty ran away with."
"That doesn't interest you?"
"It ought to make it easier to find him - if I was looking for him. You don't think he's in this mess, do you?"
She pushed her empty glass at me.
"Give me another drink. You're the hardest guy to get anything out of. You don't even move your ears."
I filled the little glass.
"You've got all you wanted out of me - a pretty good idea I'm not looking for your husband."
She put the drink down very quickly. It made her gasp - or gave her an opportunity to gasp. She let a breath out slowly.
"Rusty was no crook. If he had been, it wouldn't have been for nickles. He carried fifteen thousand dollars, in bills. He called it his mad money. He had it when I married him and he had it when he left me. No - Rusty's not in on any cheap blackmail racket." She reached for the envelope and stood up.
"I'll keep in touch with you," I said. "If you want to leave me a message, the phone girl at my apartment house will take care of it."
We walked over to the door. Tapping the white envelope against her knuckles, she said:
"You still feel you can't tell me what Dad -"
"I'd have to see him first."
She took the photo out and stood looking at it, just inside the door.
"She has a beautiful little body, hasn't she?"
"Uh-huh."
She leaned a little towards me.
"You ought to see mine," she said gravely.
"Can it be arranged?"
She laughed suddenly and sharply and went halfway through the door, then turned her head to say coolly:
"You're as cold-blooded a beast as I ever met, Marlowe. Or can I call you Phil?"
"Sure."
"You can call me Vivian."
"Thanks, Mrs. Regan."
"Oh, go to hell, Marlowe."
She went on out and didn't look back.
I let the door shut and stood with my hand on it, staring at the hand. My face felt a little hot. I went back to the desk and put the whiskey away and rinsed out the two pony glasses and put them away. I took my hat off the phone and called the D.A.'s office and asked for Bernie Ohls. He was back in his cubbyhole.
"Well, I let the old man alone," he said. "The butler said he or one of the girls would tell him. This Owen Taylor lived over the garage and I went through his stuff. Parents at Dubuque, Iowa. I wired the Chief of Police there to find out what they want done. The Sternwood family will pay for it."
"Suicide?" I asked.
"No can tell. He didn't leave any notes. He had no leave to take the car. Everybody was home last night but Mrs. Regan. She was down at Las Olindas with a playboy named Larry Cobb. I checked on that. I know a lad on one of the tables."
"You ought to stop some of that flash gambling," I said.
"With the syndicate we got in this county? Be your age, Marlow. That sap mark on the boy's head bothers me. Sure you can't help me on this?"
I liked his putting it that way. It let me say no without actually lying. We said good-by and I left the office, bought all three afternoon papers and rode a taxi down to the Hall of Justice to get my car out of the lot. There was nothing in any of the papers about Geiger. I took another look at his blue notebook, but the code was just as stubborn as it had been the night before.
The trees on the upper side of Laverne Terrace had fresh green leaves after the rain. In the cool afternoon sunlight I could see the steep drop of the hill and the flight of steps down which the killer had run after his three shots in the darkness. Two small houses fronted on the street below. They might or might not have heard the shots.
There was no activity in front of Geiger's house or anywhere along the block. The box hedge looked green and peaceful and the shingles on the roof were still damp. I drove past slowly, gnawing at an idea. I hadn't looked in the garage the night before. Once Geiger's body slipped away I hadn't really wanted to find it. It would force my hand. But dragging him to the garage, to his own car and driving that off into one of the hundred odd lonely canyons around Los Angeles would be a good way to dispose of him for days or even for weeks. That supposed two things: a key to his car and two in the party. It would narrow the sector of search quite a lot, especially as I had had his personal keys in my pocket when it happened.
I didn't get a chance to look at the garage. The doors were shut and padlocked and something moved behind the hedge as I drew level. A woman in a green and white check coat and a small button of a hat on soft blond hair stepped out of the maze and stood looking wild-eyed at my car, as if she hadn't heard it come up the hill. Then she turned swiftly and dodged back out of sight. It was Carmen Sternwood, of course.
I went on up the street and parked and walked back. In the daylight it seemed an exposed and dangerous thing to do. I went in through the hedge.
She stood there straight and silent against the locked front door. One hand went slowly up to her teeth and her teeth bit at her funny thumb. There were purple smears under her eyes and her face was gnawed white by nerves.
She half smiled at me. She said:
"Hello," in a thin, brittle voice. "Wha-what -?" That tailed off and she went back to the thumb.
"Remember me?" I said. "Doghouse Reilly, the man that grew too tall. Remember?"
She nodded and a quick jerky smile played across her face.
"Let's go in," I said. "I've got a key. Swell, huh?"
"Wha-wha -?"
I pushed her to one side and put the key in the door and opened it and pushed her in through it. I shut the door again and stood there sniffing. The place was horrible by daylight. The Chinese junk on the walls, the rug, the fussy lamps, the teakwood stuff, the sticky riot of colors, the totem pole, the flagon of ether and laudanum - all this in the daytime had a stealthy nastiness, like a fag party.
The girl and I stood looking at each other. She tried to keep a cute little smile on her face but her face was too tired to be bothered. It kept going blank on her. The smile would wash off like water off sand and her pale skin had a harsh granular texture under the stunned and stupid blankness of her eyes. A whitish tongue licked at the corners of her mouth. A pretty, spoiled and not very bright little girl who had gone very, very wrong, and nobody was doing anything about it. To hell with the rich. They made me sick. I rolled a cigarette in my fingers and pushed some books out of the way and sat on the end of the black desk. I lit my cigarette, puffed a plume of smoke and watched the thumb and tooth act for a while in silence. Carmen stood in front of me, like a bad girl in the principal's office.
"What are you doing here?" I asked her finally.
She picked at the cloth of her coat and didn't answer.
"How much do you remember of last night?"
She answered that - with a foxy glitter rising at the back of her eyes.
"Remember what? I was sick last night. I was home." Her voice was a cautious throaty sound that just reached my ears.
"Like hell you were."
Her eyes flicked up and down very swiftly.
"Before you went home," I said. "Before I took you home. Here. In that chair -" I pointed to it - "on that orange shawl. You remember all right."
A slow flush crept up her throat. That was something. She could blush. A glint of white showed under the clogged gray irises. She chewed hard on her thumb.
"You - were the one?" she breathed.
"Me. How much of it stays with you?"
She said vaguely: "Are you the police?"
"No. I'm a friend of your father's."
"You're not the police?"
"No."
She let out a thin sigh.
"Wha-what do you want?"
"Who killed him?"
Her shoulders jerked, but nothing more moved in her face.
"Who else - knows?"
"About Geiger? I don't know. Not the police, or they'd be camping here. Maybe Joe Brody."
It was a stab in the dark but it got a yelp out of her.
Then we were both silent. I dragged at my cigarette and she ate her thumb.
"Don't get clever, for God's sake," I urged her. "This is a spot for a little old-fashioned simplicity. Did Brody kill him?"
"Kill who?"
"Oh, Christ," I said.
She looked hurt. Her chin came down an inch.
"Yes," she said solemnly. "Joe did it."
"Why?"
"I don't know." She shook her head, persuading herself that she didn't know.
"Seen much of him lately?"
Her hands went down and made small white knots.
"Just once or twice. I hate him."
"Then you know where he lives."
"Yes."
"And you don't like him any more?"
"I hate him!"
"Then you'd like him for the spot."
A little blank again. I was going too fast for her. It was hard not to.
"Are you willing to tell the police it was Joe Brody?" I probed.
Sudden panic flamed all over her face.
"If I can kill the nude-photo angle, of course," I added soothingly.
She giggled. That gave me a nasty feeling. If she had screeched or wept or even nosedived to the floor in a dead faint, that would have been all right. She just giggled. It was suddenly a lot of fun. She had had her photo taken as Isis and somebody had swiped it and somebody had bumped Geiger off in front of her and she was drunker than a Legion convention, and it was suddenly a lot of nice clean fun. So she giggled. Very cute. The giggles got louder and ran around the corners of the room like rats behind the wainscoting. She started to go hysterical. I slid off the desk and stepped up close to her and gave her a smack on the side of the face.
"Just like last night," I said. "We're a scream together. Reilly and Sternwood, two stooges in search of a comedian."
The giggles stopped dead, but she didn't mind the slap any more than last night. Probably all her boy friends got around to slapping her sooner or later. I could understand how they might. I sat down on the end of the black desk again.
"Your name isn't Reilly," she said seriously. "It's Philip Marlowe. You're a private detective. Viv told me. She showed me your card." She smoothed the cheek I had slapped. She smiled at me, as if I was nice to be with.
"Well, you do remember," I said. "And you came back to look for that photo and you couldn't get into the house. Didn't you?"
Her chin ducked down and up. She worked the smile. I was having the eye put on me. I was being brought into camp. I was going to yell "Yippee!" in a minute and ask her to go to Yuma.
"The photo's gone," I said. "I looked last night, before I took you home. Probably Brody took it with him. You're not kidding me about Brody?"
She shook her head earnestly.
"It's a pushover," I said. "You don't have to give it another thought. Don't tell a soul you were here, last night or today. Not even Vivian. Just forget you were here. Leave it to Reilly."
"Your name isn't -" she began, and then stopped and shook her head vigorously in agreement with what I had said or with what she had just thought of. Her eyes became narrow and almost black and as shallow as enamel on a cafeteria tray. She had had an idea.
"I have to go home now," she said, as if we had been having a cup of tea.
"Sure."
I didn't move. She gave me another cute glance and went on towards the front door. She had her hand on the knob when we both heard a car coming. She looked at me with questions in her eyes. I shrugged. The car stopped, right in front of the house. Terror twisted her face. There were steps and the bell rang. Carmen stared back at me over her shoulder, her hand clutching the door knob, almost drooling with fear. The bell kept on ringing. Then the ringing stopped. A key tickled at the door and Carmen jumped away from it and stood frozen. The door swung open. A man stepped through it briskly and stopped dead, staring at us quietly, with complete composure.
He was a gray man, an gray, except for his polished black shoes and two scarlet diamonds in his gray satin tie that looked like the diamonds on roulette layouts. His shirt was gray and his double-breasted suit of soft, beautifully cut flannel. Seeing Carmen he took a gray hat off and his hair underneath it was gray and as fine as if it had been sifted through gauze. His thick gray eyebrows had that indefinably sporty look. He had a long chin, a nose with a hook to it, thoughtful gray eyes that had a slanted look because the fold of skin over his upper lid came down over the corner of the lid itself.
He stood there politely, one hand touching the door at his back, the other holding the gray hat and flapping it gently against his thigh. He looked hard, not the hardness of the tough guy. More like the hardness of a well-weathered horseman. But he was no horseman. He was Eddie Mars.
He pushed the door shut behind him and put that hand in the lap-seamed pocket of his coat and left the thumb outside to glisten in the rather dim light of the room. He smiled at Carmen. He had a nice easy smile. She licked her lips and stared at him. The fear went out of her face. She smiled back.
"Excuse the casual entrance," he said. "The bell didn't seem to rouse anybody. Is Mr. Geiger around?"
I said: "No. We don't know just where he is. We found the door a little open. We stepped inside."
He nodded and touched his long chin with the brim of his hat.
"You're friends of his, of course?"
"Just business acquaintances. We dropped by for a book."
"A book, eh?" He said that quickly and brightly and, I thought, a little slyly, as if he knew all about Geiger's books. Then he looked at Carmen again and shrugged.
I moved towards the door.
"We'll trot along now," I said. I took hold of her arm. She was staring at Eddie Mars. She liked him.
"Any message - if Geiger comes back?" Eddie Mars asked gently.
"We won't bother you."
"That's too bad," he said, with too much meaning. His gray eyes twinkled and then hardened as I went past him to open the door. He added in a casual tone: "The girl can dust. I'd like to talk to you a little, soldier."
I let go of her arm. I gave him a blank stare.
"Kidder, eh?" he said nicely. "Don't waste it. I've got two boys outside in a car that always do just what I want them to."
Carmen made a sound at my side and bolted through the door. Her steps faded rapidly down hill. I hadn't seen her car, so she must have left it down below. I started to say:
"What the hell -!"
"Oh, skip it," Eddie Mars sighed. "There's something wrong around here. I'm going to find out what it is. If you want to pick lead out of your belly, get in my way."
"Well, well," I said, "a tough guy."
"Only when necessary, soldier." He wasn't looking at me any more. He was walking around the room, frowning, not paying any attention to me. I looked out above the broken pane of the front window. The top of a car showed over the hedge. Its motor idled.
Eddie Mars found the purple flagon and the two gold-veined glasses on the desk. He sniffed at one of the glasses, then at the flagon. A disgusted smile wrinkled his lips.
"The lousy pimp," he said tonelessly.
He looked at a couple of books, grunted, went on around the desk and stood in front of the little totem pole with the camera eye. He studied it, dropped his glance to the floor in front of it. He moved the small rug with his foot, then bent swiftly, his body tense. He went down on the floor with one gray knee. The desk hid him from me partly. There was a sharp exclamation and he came up again. His arm flashed under his coat and a black Luger appeared in his hand. He held it in long brown fingers, not pointing it at me me, not pointing it at anything.
"Blood," he said. "Blood on the floor there, under the rug. Quite a lot of blood."
"Is that so?" I said, looking interested.
He slid into the chair behind the desk and hooked the mulberry-colored phone towards him and shifted the Luger to his left hand. He frowned sharply at the telephone, bringing his thick gray eyebrows close together and making a hard crease in the weathered skin at the top of his hooked nose.
"I think we'll have some law," he said.
I went over and kicked at the rug that lay where Geiger had lain. "It's old blood," I said. "Dried blood."
"Just the same we'll have some law."
"Why not?" I said.
His eyes went narrow. The veneer had flaked off him, leaving a well-dressed hard boy with a Luger. He didn't like my agreeing with him.
"Just who the hell are you, soldier?"
"Marlowe is the name. I'm a sleuth."
"Never heard of you. Who's the girl?"
"Client. Geiger was trying to throw a loop on her with some blackmail. We came to talk it over. He wasn't here. The door being open we walked in to wait. Or did I tell you that?"
"Convenient," he said. "The door being open. When you didn't have a key."
"Yes. How come you had a key?"
"Is that any of your business, soldier?"
"I could make it my business."
He smiled tightly and pushed his hat back on his gray hair.
"And I could make your business my business."
"You wouldn't like it. The pay's too small."
"All right, bright eyes. I own this house. Geiger is my tenant. Now what do you think of that?"
"You know such lovely people."
"I take them as they come. They come all kinds." He glanced down at the Luger, shrugged and tucked it back under his arm. "Got any good ideas, soldier?"
"Lots of them. Somebody gunned Geiger. Somebody got gunned by Geiger, who ran away. Or it was two other fellows. Or Geiger was running a cult and made blood sacrifices in front of that totem pole. Or he had chicken for dinner and liked to kill his chickens in the front parlor."
The gray man scowled at me.
"I give up," I said. "Better call your friends downtown."
"I don't get it," he snapped. "I don't get your game here."
"Go ahead, call the buttons. You'll get a big reaction from it."
He thought that over without moving. His lips went back against his teeth.
"I don't get that, either," he said tightly.
"Maybe it just isn't your day. I know you, Mr. Mars. The Cypress Club at Las Olindas. Flash gambling for flash people. The local law in your pocket and a well-greased line into L.A. In other words, protection. Geiger was in a racket that needed that too. Perhaps you spared him a little now and then, seeing he's your tenant."
His mouth became a hard white grimace.
"Geiger was in what racket?"
"The smut book racket."
He stared at me for a long level minute.
"Somebody got to him," he said softly. "You know something about it. He didn't show at the store today. They don't know where he is. He didn't answer the phone here. I came up to see about it. I find blood on the floor, under a rug. And you and a girl here."
"A little weak," I said. "But maybe you can sell the story to a willing buyer. You missed a little something, though. Somebody moved his books out of the store today - the nice books he rented out."
He snapped his fingers sharply and said:
"I should have thought of that, soldier. You seem to get around. How do you figure it?"
"I think Geiger was rubbed. I think that is his blood. And the books being moved out gives a motive for hiding the body for a while. Somebody is taking over the racket and wants a little time to organize."
"They can't get away with it," Eddie Mars said grimly.
"Who says so? You and a couple of gunmen in your car outside? This is a big town now, Eddie. Some very tough people have checked in here lately. The penalty of growth."
"You talk too damned much," Eddie Mars said. He bared his teeth and whistled twice, sharply. A car slammed outside and running steps came through the hedge. Mars flicked the Luger out again and pointed it at my chest. "Open the door."
The knob rattled and a voice called out. I didn't move. The muzzle of the Luger looked like the mouth of the Second Street tunnel, but I didn't move. Not being bullet proof is an idea I had had to get used to.
"Open it yourself, Eddie. Who the hell are you to give me orders? Be nice and I might help you out."
He came to his feet rigidly and moved around the end of the desk and over to the door. He opened it without taking his eyes off me. Two men tumbled into the room, reaching busily under their arms. One was an obvious pug, a good-looking pale-faced boy with a bad nose and one ear like a club steak. The other man was slim, blond, deadpan, with close-set eyes and no color in them.
Eddie Mars said: "See if this bird is wearing any iron."
The blond flicked a short-barreled gun out and stood pointing it at me. The pug sidled over flatfooted and felt my pockets with care. I turned around for like a bored beauty modeling an evening gown.
"No gun," he said in a burry voice.
"Find out who he is."
The pug slipped a hand into my breast pocket and drew out my wallet. He flipped it open and studied the contents.
"Name's Philip Marlowe, Eddie. Lives at the Hobart Arms on Franklin. Private license, deputy's badge and all. A shamus." He slipped the wallet back in my pocket, slapped my face lightly and turned away.
"Beat it," Eddie Mars said.
The two gunmen went out again and closed the door. There was the sound of them getting back into the car. They started its motor and kept it idling once more.
"All right. Talk," Eddie Mars snapped. The peaks of his eyebrows made sharp angles against his forehead.
"I'm not ready to give out. Killing Geiger to grab his racket would be a dumb trick and I'm not sure it happened that way, assuming he has been killed. But I'm sure that whoever got the books knows what's what, and I'm sure that the blonde lady down at his store is scared batty about something or other. And I have a guess who got the books."
"Who?"
"That's the part I'm not ready to give out. I've got a client, you know."
He wrinkled his nose.
"That -" he chopped it off quickly.
"I expected you would know the girl," I said.
"Who got the books, soldier?"
"Not ready to talk, Eddie. Why should I?"
He put the Luger down on the desk and slapped it with his open palm.
"This," he said. "And I might make it worth your while."
"That's the spirit. Leave the gun out of it. I can always hear the sound of money. How much are you clinking at me?"
"For doing what?"
"What did you want done?"
He slammed the desk hard.
"Listen, soldier. I ask you a question and you ask me another. We're not getting anywhere. I want to know where Geiger is, for my own personal reasons. I didn't like his racket and I didn't protect him. I happen to own this house. I'm not so crazy about that right now. I can believe that whatever you know about all this is under glass, or there would be a flock of johns squeaking sole leather around this dump. You haven't got anything to sell. My guess is you need a little protection yourself. So cough up."
It was a good guess, but I wasn't going to let him know it. I lit a cigarette and blew the match out and flicked it at the glass eye of the totem pole.
"You're right," I said. "If anything has happened to Geiger, I'll have to give what I have to the law. Which puts it in the public domain and doesn't leave me anything to sell. So with your permission I'll just drift."
His face whitened under the tan. He looked mean, fast and tough for a moment. He made a movement to lift the gun. I added casually:
"By the way, how is Mrs. Mars these days?"
I thought for a moment I had kidded him a little too far. His hand jerked at the gun, shaking. His face was stretched out by hard muscles.
"Beat it," he said quite softly. "I don't give a damn where you go or what you do when you get there. Only take a word of advice, soldier. Leave me out of your plans or you'll wish your name was Murphy and you lived in Limerick."
"Well, that's not so far from Clonmel," I said. "I hear you had a pal came from there."
He leaned down on the desk, frozen-eyed, unmoving. I went over to the door and opened it and looked back at him. His eyes had followed me, but his lean gray body had not moved. There was hate in his eyes.
I went out and through the hedge and up the hill to my car and got into it. I turned it around and drove up over the crest. Nobody shot at me. After a few blocks I turned off, cut the motor and sat for a few moments. Nobody followed me either. I drove back into Hollywood.
It was ten minutes to five when I parked near the lobby entrance of the apartment house on Randall Place. A few windows were lit and radios were bleating at the dusk. I rode the automatic elevator up to the fourth floor and went along a wide hall carpeted in green and paneled in ivory. A cool breeze blew down the hall from the open screened door to the fire escape.
There was a small ivory pushbutton beside the door marked "405." I pushed it and waited what seemed a long time. Then the door opened noiselessly about a foot. There was a steady, furtive air in the way it opened. The man was long-legged, long-waisted, high-shouldered and he had dark brown eyes in a brown expressionless face that had learned to control its expressions long ago. Hair like steel wool grew far back on his head and gave him a great deal of domed brown forehead that might at a careless glance have seemed a dwelling place for brains. His somber eyes probed at me impersonally. His long thin brown fingers held the edge of the door. He said nothing.
I said: "Geiger?"
Nothing in the man's face changed that I could see. He brought a cigarette from behind the door and tucked it between his lips and drew a little smoke from it. The smoke came towards me in a lazy, contemptuous puff and behind it words in a cool, unhurried voice that had no more inflection than the voice of a faro dealer.
"You said what?"
"Geiger. Arthur Gwynn Geiger. The guy that has the books."
The man considered that without any haste. He glanced down at the tip of his cigarette. His other hand, the one that had been holding the door, dropped out of sight. His shoulder had a look as though his hidden hand might be making motions.
"Don't know anybody by that name," he said. "Does he live around here?"
I smiled. He didn't like the smile. His eyes got nasty.
I said: "You're Joe Brody?"
The brown face hardened.
"So what? Got a grift, brother - or just amusing yourself?"
"So you're Joe Brody," I said. "And you don't know anybody named Geiger. That's very funny."
"Yeah? You got a funny sense of humor maybe. Take it away and play on it somewhere else."
I leaned against the door and gave him a dreamy smile.
"You got the books, Joe. I got the sucker list. We ought to talk things over."
He didn't shift his eyes from my face. There was a faint sound in the room behind him, as though a metal curtain ring clicked lightly on a metal rod. He glanced sideways into the room. He opened the door wider.
"Why not - if you think you've got something?" he said coolly. He stood aside from the door. I went past him into the room.
It was a cheerful room with good furniture and not too much of it. French windows in the end wall opened on a stone porch and looked across the dusk at the foothills. Near the windows a closed door in the west wall and near the entrance door another door in the same wall. This last had a plush curtain drawn across it on a thin brass rod below the lintel.
That left the east wall, in which there were no doors. There was a davenport backed against the middle of it, so I sat down on the davenport. Brody shut the door and walked crab-fashion to a tall oak desk studded with square nails. A cedarwood box with gilt hinges lay on the lowered leaf of the desk. He carried the box to an easy chair midway between the other two doors and sat down. I dropped my hat on the davenport and waited.
"Well, I'm listening," Brody said. He opened the cigar box and dropped his cigarette stub into a dish at his side. He put a long thin cigar in his mouth. "Cigar?" He tossed one at me through the air.
I reached for it. Brody took a gun out of the cigar box and pointed it at my nose. I looked at the gun. It was a black Police.39. I had no argument against it at the moment.
"Neat, huh?" Brody said. "Just kind of stand up a minute. Come forward just about two yards. You might grab a little air while you're doing that." His voice was the elaborately casual voice of the tough guy in pictures. Pictures have made them all like that.
"Tsk, tsk," I said, not moving at all. "Such a lot of guns around town and so few brains. You're the second guy I've met within hours who seems to think a gat in the hand means a world by the tail. Put it down and don't be silly, Joe."
His eyebrows came together and he pushed his chin at me. His eyes were mean.
"The other guy's name is Eddie Mars," I said. "Ever hear of him?"
"No." Brody kept the gun pointed at me.
"If he ever gets wise to where you were last night in the rain, he'll wipe you off the way a check raiser wipes a check."
"What would I be to Eddie Mars?" Brody asked coldly. But he lowered the gun to his knee.
"Not even a memory," I said.
We stared at each other. I didn't look at the pointed black slipper that showed under the plush curtain on the doorway to my left.
Brody said quietly:
"Don't get me wrong. I'm not a tough guy - just careful. I don't know hell's first whisper about you. You might be a life-taker for all I know."
"You're not careful enough," I said. "That play with Geiger's books was terrible."
He drew a long slow breath and let it out silently. Then he leaned back and crossed his long legs and held the Colt on his knee.
"Don't kid yourself I won't use this heat, if I have to," he said. "What's your story?"
"Have your friend with the pointed slippers come on in. She gets tired holding her breath."
Brody called out without moving his eyes off my stomach.
"Come on in, Agnes."
The curtain swung aside and the green-eyed, thigh-swinging ash blonde from Geiger's store joined us in the room. She looked at me with a kind of mangled hatred. Her nostrils were pinched and her eyes had darkened a couple of shades. She looked very unhappy.
"I knew damn well you were trouble," she snapped at me. "I told Joe to watch his step."
"It's not his step, it's the back of his lap he ought to watch," I said.
"I suppose that's funny," the blonde squealed.
"It has been," I said. "But it probably isn't any more."
"Save the gags," Brody advised me. "Joe's watchin' his step plenty. Put some light on so I can see to pop this guy, if it works out that way."
The blonde snicked on a light in a big square standing lamp. She sank down into a chair beside the lamp and sat stiffly, as if her girdle was too tight. I put my cigar in my mouth and bit the end off. Brody's Colt took a close interest in me while I got matches out and lit the cigar. I tasted the smoke and said:
"The sucker list I spoke of is in code. I haven't cracked it yet, but there are about five hundred names. You got twelve boxes of books that I know of. You should have at least five hundred books. There'll be a bunch more out on loan, but say five hundred is the full crop, just to be cautious. If it's a good active list and you could run it even fifty per cent down the line, that would be one hundred and twenty-five thousand rentals. Your girl friend knows an about that. I'm only guessing. Put the average rental as low as you like, but it won't be less than a dollar. That merchandise costs money. At a dollar a rental you take one hundred and twenty-five grand and you still have your capital. I mean, you still have Geiger's capital. That's enough to spot a guy for."
The blonde yelped:
"You're crazy, you goddam eggheaded -!"
Brody put his teeth sideways at her and snarled:
"Pipe down, for Chrissake. Pipe down!"
She subsided into an outraged mixture of slow anguish and bottled fury. Her silvery nails scraped on her knees.
"It's no racket for bums," I told Brody almost affectionately. "It takes a smooth worker like you, Joe. You've got to get confidence and keep it. People who spend their money for second-hand sex jags are as nervous as dowagers who can't find the rest room. Personally I think the blackmail angles are a big mistake. I'm for shedding all that and sticking to legitimate sales and rentals.
Brody's dark brown stare moved up and down my face. His Colt went on hungering for my vital organs.
"You're a funny guy," he said tonelessly. "Who has this lovely racket?"
"You have," I said. "Almost."
The blonde choked and clawed her ear. Brody didn't say anything. He just looked at me.
"What?" the blonde yelped. "You sit there and try to tell us Mr. Geiger ran the kind of business right down on the main drag? You're nuts!"
I leered at her politely.
"Sure I do. Everybody knows the racket exists. Hollywood's made to order for it. If a thing like that has to exist, then right out on the street is where all practical coppers want it to exist. For the same reason they favor red light districts. They know where to flush the game when they want to."
"My God," the blonde wailed. "You let this cheesehead sit there and insult me, Joe? You with a gun in your hand and him holding nothing but a cigar and his thumb?"
"I like it," Brody said. "The guy's got good ideas. Shut your trap and keep it shut, or I'll slap it shut for you with this." He flicked the gun around in an increasingly negligent manner.
The blonde gasped and turned her face to the wall. Brody looked at me and said cunningly:
"How have I got that lovely racket?"
"You shot Geiger to get it. Last night in the rain. It was dandy shooting weather. The trouble is he wasn't alone when you whiffed him. Either you didn't notice that, which seems unlikely, or you got the wind up and lammed. But you had nerve enough to take the plate out of his camera and you had nerve enough to come back later on and hide his corpse, so you could tidy up on the books before the law knew it had a murder to investigate."
"Yah," Brody said contemptuously. The Colt wobbled on his knee. His brown face was as hard as a piece of carved wood. "You take chances, mister. It's kind of goddamned lucky for you I didn't bop Geiger."
"You can step off for it just the same," I told him cheerfully. "You're made to order for the rap."
Brody's voice rustled.
"Think you got me framed for it?"
"Positive."
"How come?"
"There's somebody who'll tell it that way. I told you there was a witness. Don't go simple on me, Joe."
He exploded then.
"That goddamned little hot pants!" he yelled. "She would, god damn her! She would - just that!"
I leaned back and grinned at him.
"Swell. I thought you had those nude photos of her."
He didn't say anything. The blonde didn't say anything. I let them chew on it. Brody's face cleared slowly, with a sort of grayish relief. He put his Colt down on the end table beside his chair but kept his right hand close to it. He knocked ash from his cigar on the carpet and stared at me with eyes that were a tight shine between narrowed lids.
"I guess you think I'm dumb," Brody said.
"Just average, for a grifter. Get the pictures."
"What pictures?"
I shook my head. "Wrong play, Joe. Innocence gets you nowhere. You were either there last night, or you got the nude photo from somebody that was there. You knew she was there, because you had your girl friend threaten Mrs. Regan with a police rap. The only ways you could know enough to do that would be by seeing what happened or by holding the photo and knowing where and when it was taken. Cough up and be sensible."
"I'd have to have a little dough," Brody said. He turned his head a little to look at the green-eyed blonde. Not now green-eyed and only superficially a blonde. She was as limp as a fresh-killed rabbit.
"No dough," I said.
He scowled bitterly.
"How'd you get to me?"
I flicked my wallet out and let him look at my buzzer.
"I was working on Geiger - for a client. I was outside last night, in the rain. I heard the shots. I crashed in. I didn't see the killer. I saw everything else."
"And kept your lip buttoned," Brody sneered.
I put my wallet away.
"Yes," I admitted. "Up till now. Do I get the photos or not?"
"About these books," Brody said. "I don't get that."
"I tailed them here from Geiger's store. I have a witness."
"That punk kid?"
"What punk kid?"
He scowled again.
"The kid that works at the store. He skipped out after the truck left. Agnes don't even know where he flops."
"That helps," I said, grinning at him. "That angle worried me a little. Either of you ever been in Geiger's house - before last night?"
"Not even last night," Brody said sharply. "So she says I gunned him, eh?"
"With the photos in hand I might be able to convince her she was wrong. There was a little drinking being done."
Brody sighed.
"She hates my guts. I bounced her out. I got paid, sure, but I'd of had to do it anyway. She's too screwy for a simple guy like me." He cleared his throat. "How about a little dough? I'm down to nickels. Agnes and me gotta move on."
"Not from my client."
"Listen -"
"Get the pictures, Brody."
"Oh, hell," he said. "You win."
He stood up and slipped the Colt into his side pocket. His left hand went up inside his coat. He was holding it there, his face twisted with disgust, when the door buzzer rang and kept on ringing.
He didn't like that. His lower lip went in under his teeth, and his eyebrows drew down sharply at the corners. His whole face became sharp and foxy and mean.
The buzzer kept up its song. I didn't like it either. If the visitors should happen to be Eddie Mars and his boys, I might get chilled off just for being there. If it was the police, I was caught with nothing to give them but a smile and a promise. And if it was some of Brody's friends - supposing he had any - they might turn out to be tougher than he was.
The blonde didn't like it. She stood up in a surge and chipped at the air with one hand. Nerve tension made her face old and ugly.
Watching me, Brody jerked a small drawer in the desk and picked a bone-handled automatic out of it. He held it at the blonde. She slid over to him and took it, shaking.
"Sit down next to him," Brady snapped. "Hold it on him low down, away from the door. If he gets funny use your own judgment. We ain't licked yet, baby."
"Oh, Joe," the blonde wailed. She came over and sat next to me on the davenport and pointed the gun at my leg artery. I didn't like the jerky look in her eyes.
The door buzzer stopped humming and a quick impatient rapping on the wood followed it. Brody put his hand in his pocket, on his gun, and walked over to the door and opened it with his left hand. Carmen Sternwood pushed him back into the room by putting a little revolver against his lean brown lips.
Brady backed away from her with his mouth working and an expression of panic on his face. Carmen shut the door behind her and looked neither at me nor at Agnes. She stalked Brady carefully, her tongue sticking out a little between her teeth. Brody took both hands out of his pockets and gestured placatingly at her. His eyebrows designed themselves into an odd assortment of curves and angles.
Agnes turned the gun away from me and swung it at Carmen. I shot my hand out and closed my fingers down hard over her hand and jammed my thumb on the safety catch. It was already on. I kept it on. There was a short silent tussle, to which neither Brody nor Carmen paid any attention whatever. I had the gun. Agnes breathed deeply and shivered the whole length of her body. Carmen's face had a bony scraped look and her breath hissed. Her voice said without tone:
"I want my pictures, Joe."
Brody swallowed and tried to grin.
"Sure, kid, sure."
He said it in a small flat voice that was as much like the voice he had used to me as a scooter is like a ten-ton truck.
Carmen said: "You shot Arthur Geiger. I saw you. I want my pictures.
Brody turned green.
"Hey, wait a minute, Carmen," I yelped.
Blonde Agnes came to life with a rush. She ducked her head and sank her teeth in my right hand. I made more noises and shook her off.
"Listen, kid," Brody whined. "Listen a minute -"
The blonde spat at me and threw herself on my leg and tried to bite that. I cracked her on the head with the gun, not very hard, and tried to stand up. She rolled down my legs and wrapped her arms around them. I fell back on the davenport. The blonde was strong with the madness of love or fear, or a mixture of both, or maybe she was just strong.
Brody grabbed for the little revolver that was so close to his face. He missed. The gun made a sharp rapping noise that was not very loud. The bullet broke glass in a folded-back French window. Brody groaned horribly and fell down on the floor and jerked Carmen's feet from under her. She landed in a heap and the little revolver went skidding off into a corner. Brody jumped up on his knees and reached for his pocket.
I bit Agnes on the head with less delicacy than before, kicked her off my feet, and stood up. Brody flicked his eyes at me. I showed him the automatic. He stopped trying to get his hand into his pocket.
"Christ!" he whined. "Don't let her kill me!
I began to laugh. I laughed like an idiot, without control. Blonde Agnes was sitting up on the floor with her hands flat on the carpet and her mouth wide open and a wick of metallic blond hair down over her right eye. Carmen was crawling on her hands and knees, still hissing. The metal of her little revolver glistened against the baseboard over in the corner. She crawled towards it rentlessly.
I waved my share of the guns at Brody and said:
"Stay put. You're all right."
I stepped past the crawling girl and picked the gun up. She looked up at me and began to giggle. I put her gun in my pocket and patted her on the back.
"Get up, angel. You look like a Pekinese."
I went over to Brody and put the automatic against his midriff and reached his Colt out of his side pocket. I now had all the guns that had been exposed to view. I stuffed them into my pockets and held my hand out to him.
"Give."
He nodded, licking his lips, his eyes still scared. He took a fat envelope out of his breast pocket and gave it to me. There was a developed plate in the envelope and five glossy prints.
"Sure these are all?"
He nodded again. I put the envelope in my own breast pocket and turned away. Agnes was back on the davenport, straightening her hair. Her eyes ate Carmen with a green distillation of hate. Carmen was up on her feet too, coming towards me with her hand out, still giggling and hissing. There was a little froth at the corners of her mouth. Her small white teeth glinted close to her lips.
"Can I have them now?" she asked me with a coy smile.
"I'll take care of them for you. Go on home."
"Home?"
I went to the door and looked out. The cool night breeze was blowing peacefully down the hall. No excited neighbors hung out of doorways. A small gun had gone off and broken a pane of glass, but noises like that don't mean much any more. I held the door open and jerked my head at Carmen. She came towards me, smiling uncertainly.
"Go on home and wait for me," I said soothingly.
She put her thumb up. Then she nodded and slipped past me into the hail. She touched my cheek with her fingers as she went by.
"You'll take care of Carmen, won't you?" she cooed.
"Check."
"You're cute."
"What you see is nothing," I said. "I've got a Bali dancing girl tattooed on my right thigh."
Her eyes rounded. She said: "Naughty," and wagged a finger at me. Then she whispered:
"Can I have my gun?"
"Not now. Later. I'll bring it to you."
She grabbed me suddenly around the neck and kissed me on the mouth.
"I like you," she said. "Carmen likes you a lot."
She ran off down the hall as gay as a thrush, waved at me from the stairs and ran down the stairs out of my sight.
I went back into Brody's apartment.
I went over to the folded-back French window and looked at the small broken pane in the upper part of it. The bullet from Carmen's gun had smashed the glass like a blow. It had not made a hole. There was a small hole in the plaster which a keen eye would find quickly enough. I pulled the drapes over the broken pane and took Carmen's gun out of my pocket. It was a Banker's Special, .22 caliber, hollow point cartridges. It had a pearl grip, and a small round silver plate set into the butt was engraved: "Carmen from Owen." She made saps of all of them.
I put the gun back in my pocket and sat down close to Brody and stared into his bleak brown eyes. A minute passed. The blonde adjusted her face by the aid of a pocket mirror. Brody fumbled around with a cigarette and jerked:
"Satisfied?"
"So far. Why did you put the bite on Mrs. Regan instead of the old man?"
"Tapped the old man once. About six, seven months ago. I figure maybe he gets sore enough to call in some law."
"What made you think Mrs. Regan wouldn't tell him about it?"
He considered that with some care, smoking his cigarette and keeping his eyes on my face. Finally he said:
"How well you know her?"
"I've met her twice. You must know her a lot better to take a chance on that squeeze with the photo."
"She skates around plenty. I figure maybe she has a couple of soft spots she don't want the old man to know about. I figure she can raise five grand easy."
"A little weak," I said. "But pass it. You're broke, eh?"
"I been shaking two nickels together for a month, trying to get them to mate."
"What you do for a living?"
"Insurance. I got desk room in Puss Walgreen's office, Fulwider Building, Western and Santa Monica."
"When you open up, you open up. The books here in your apartment?"
He snapped his teeth and waved a brown hand. Confidence was oozing back into his manner.
"Hell, no. In storage."
"You had a man bring them here and then you had a storage outfit come and take them away again right afterwards?"
"Sure. I don't want them moved direct from Geiger's place, do I?"
"You're smart," I said admiringly. "Anything incriminating in the joint right now?"
He looked worried again. He shook his head sharply.
"That's fine," I told him. I looked across at Agnes. She had finished fixing her face and was staring at the wall, blank-eyed, hardly listening. Her face had the drowsiness which strain and shock induce, after their first incidence.
Brody flicked his eyes warily.
"Well?"
"How'd you come by the photo?"
He scowled.
"Listen, you got what you came after, got it plenty cheap. You done a nice neat job. Now go peddle it to your top man. I'm clean. I don't know nothing about any photo, do I, Agnes?"
The blonde opened her eyes and looked at him with vague but uncomplimentary speculation.
"A half smart guy," she said with a tired sniff. "That's all I ever draw. Never once a guy that's smart all the way around the course. Never once."
I grinned at her.
"Did I hurt your head much?"
"You and every other man I ever met."
I looked back at Brody. He was pinching his cigarette between his fingers, with a sort of twitch. His hand seemed to be shaking a little. His brown poker face was still smooth.
"We've got to agree on a story," I said. "For instance, Carmen wasn't here. That's very important. She wasn't here. That was a vision you saw."
"Huh!" Brody sneered.
"If you say so, pal, and if -" he put his hand out palm up and cupped the fingers and rolled the thumb gently against the index and middle fingers.
I nodded.
"We'll see. There might be a small contribution. You won't count it in grands, though. Now where did you get the picture?"
"A guy slipped it to me."
"Uh-huh. A guy you just passed in the street. You wouldn't know him again. You never saw him before."
Brody yawned.
"It dropped out of his pocket," he leered.
"Uh-huh. Got an alibi for last night, poker pan?"
"Sure. I was right here. Agnes was with me. Okey, Agnes?"
"I'm beginning to feel sorry for you again," I said.
His eyes flicked wide and his mouth hung loose, the cigarette balanced on his lower lip.
"You think you're smart and you're so goddamned dumb," I told him. "Even if you don't dance off up in Quentin, you have such a bleak long lonely time ahead of you."
His cigarette jerked and dropped ash on his vest.
"Thinking about how smart you are," I said.
"Take the air," he growled suddenly. "Dust. I got enough chinning with you. Beat it."
"Okey." I stood up and went over to the tall oak desk and took his two guns out of my pockets, laid them side by side on the blotter so that the barrels were exactly parallel. I reached my hat off the floor beside the davenport and started for the door.
Brody yelped:
"Hey!"
I turned and waited. His cigarette was jiggling like a doll on a coiled spring.
"Everything's smooth, ain't it?" he asked.
"Why, sure. This is a free country. You don't have to stay out of jail, if you don't want to. That is, if you're a citizen. Are you a citizen?"
He just stared at me, jiggling the cigarette. The blonde Agnes turned her head slowly and stared at me along the same level. Their glances contained almost the exact same blend of foxiness, doubt and frustrated anger. Agnes reached her silvery nails up abruptly and yanked a hair out of her head and broke it between her fingers, with a bitter jerk.
Brody said tightly:
"You're not going to any cops, brother. Not if it's the Sternwoods you're working for. I've got too much stuff on that family. You got your pictures and you got your hush. Go and peddle your papers."
"Make your mind up," I said. "You told me to dust, I was on my way out, you hollered at me and I stopped, and now I'm on my way out again. Is that what you want?"
"You ain't got anything on me," Brody said.
"Just a couple of murders. Small change in your circle."
He didn't jump more than an inch, but it looked like a foot. The white cornea showed all around the tobacco-colored iris of his eyes. The brown skin of his face took on a greenish tinge in the lamplight.
Blonde Agnes let out a low animal wail and buried her head in a cushion on the end of the davenport. I stood there and admired the long line of her thighs.
Brody moistened his lips slowly and said:
"Sit down, pal. Maybe I have a little more for you. What's that crack about two murders mean?"
I leaned against the door.
"Where were you last night about seven-thirty, Joe?"
His mouth drooped sulkily and he stared down at the floor.
"I was watching a guy, a guy who had a nice racket I figured he needed a partner in. Geiger. I was watching him now and then to see had he any tough connections. I figure he has friends or he don't work the racket as open as he does. But they don't go to his house. Only dames."
"You didn't watch hard enough," I said. "Go on."
"I'm there last night on the street below Geiger's house. It's raining hard and I'm buttoned up in my coupe and I don't see anything. There's a car in front of Geiger's and another car a little way up the hill. That's why I stay down below. There's a big Buick parked down where I am and after a while I go over and take a gander into it. It's registered to Vivian Regan. Nothing happens, so I scram. That's all." He waved his cigarette. His eyes crawled up and down my face.
"Could be," I said. "Know where that Buick is now?"
"Why would I?"
"In the Sheriff's garage. It was lifted out of twelve feet of water off Lido fish pier this a.m. There was a dead man in it. He had been sapped and the car pointed out the pier and the hand throttle pulled down."
Brody was breathing hard. One of his feet tapped restlessly.
"Jesus, guy, you can't pin that one on me," he said thickly.
"Why not? This Buick was down back of Geiger's according to you. Well, Mrs. Regan didn't have it out. Her chauffeur, a lad named Owen Taylor, had it out. He went over to Geiger's place to have words with him, because Owen Taylor was sweet on Carmen, and he didn't like the kind of games Geiger was playing with her. He let himself in the back way with a jimmy and a gun and he caught Geiger taking a photo of Carmen without any clothes on. So his gun went off, as guns will, and Geiger fell down dead and Owen ran away, but not without the photo negative Geiger had just taken. So you ran after him and took the photo from him. How else would you have got hold of it?"
Brody licked his lips.
"Yeah," he said. "But that don't make me knock him off. Sure, I heard the shots and saw this killer come slamming down the back steps into the Buick and off. I took out after him. He hit the bottom of the canyon and went west on Sunset. Beyond Beverly Hills he skidded off the road and had to stop and I came up and played copper. He had a gun but his nerve was bad and I sapped him down. So I went through his clothes and found out who he was and I lifted the plateholder, just out of curiosity. I was wondering what it was all about and getting my neck wet when he came out of it all of a sudden and knocked me off the car. He was out of sight when I picked myself up. That's the last I saw of him."
"How did you know it was Geiger he shot?" I asked gruffly.
Brody shrugged.
"I figure it was, but I can be wrong. When I had the plate developed and saw what was on it, I was pretty damn sure. And when Geiger didn't come down to the store this morning and didn't answer his phone I was plenty sure. So I figure it's a good time to move his books out and make a quick touch on the Sternwoods for travel money and blow for a while."
I nodded.
"That seems reasonable. Maybe you didn't murder anybody at that. Where did you hide Geiger's body?"
He jumped his eyebrows. Then he grinned.
"Nix, nix. Skip it. You think I'd go back there and handle him, not knowing when a couple carloads of law would come tearing around the corner? Nix."
"Somebody hid the body," I said.
Brody shrugged. The grin stayed on his face. He didn't believe me. While he was still not believing me the door buzzer started to ring again. Brody stood up sharply, hard-eyed. He glanced over at his guns on the desk.
"So she's back again," he growled.
"If she is, she doesn't have her guns!' I comforted him. "Don't you have any other friends?"
"Just about one," he growled. "I got enough of this puss in the corner game."
He marched to the desk and took the Colt. He held it down at his side and went to the door. He put his left hand to the knob and twisted it and opened the door a foot and leaned into the opening, holding the gun tight against his thigh.
A voice said: "Brody?"
Brody said something I didn't hear. The two quick reports were muffled. The gun must have been pressed tight against Brody's body. He tilted forward against the door and the weight of his body pushed it shut with a bang. He slid down the wood. His feet pushed the carpet away behind him. His left hand dropped off the knob and the arm slapped the floor with a thud. His head was wedged against the door. He didn't move. The Colt clung to his right hand.
I jumped across the room and rolled him enough to get the door open and crowd through. A woman peered out of a door almost opposite. Her face was full of fright and she pointed along the hall with a clawlike hand.
I raced down the hall and heard thumping feet going down the tile steps and went down after the sound. At the lobby level the front door was closing itself quietly and running feet slapped the sidewalk outside. I made the door before it was shut, clawed it open again and charged out. A tall hatless figure in a leather jerkin was running diagonally across the street between the parked cars. The figure turned and flame spurted from it. Two heavy hammers hit the stucco wall beside me. The figure ran on, dodged between two cars, vanished.
A man came up beside me and barked:
"What happened?"
"Shooting going on," I said.
"Jesus!" He scuttled into the apartment house.
I walked quickly down the sidewalk to my car and got in and started it. I pulled out from the curb and drove down the hill, not fast. No other car started up on the other side of the street. I thought I heard steps, but I wasn't sure about that. I rode down the hill a block and a half, turned at the intersection and started back up. The sound of a muted whistling came to me faintly along the sidewalk. Then steps. I double parked and slid out between two cars and went down low. I took Carmen's little revolver out of my pocket.
The sound of the steps grew louder, and the whistling went on cheerfully. In a moment the jerkin showed. I stepped out between the two cars and said:
"Got a match, buddy?"
The boy spun towards me and his right hand darted up to go inside the jerkin. His eyes were a wet shine in the glow of the round electroliers. Moist dark eyes shaped like almonds, and a pallid handsome face with wavy black hair growing low on the forehead in two points. A very handsome boy indeed, the boy from Geiger's store.
He stood there looking at me silently, his right hand on the edge of the jerkin, but not inside it yet. I held the little revolver down at my side.
"You must have thought a lot of that queen," I said.
"Go - yourself," the boy said softly, motionless between the parked cars and the five-foot retaining wall on the inside of the sidewalk.
A siren wailed distantly coming up the long hill. The boy's head jerked towards the sound. I stepped in close and put my gun into his jerkin.
"Me or the cops?" I asked him.
His head rolled a little sideways as if I had slapped his face.
"Who are you?" he snarled.
"Friend of Geiger's."
"Get away from me, you son of a bitch."
"This is a small gun, kid. I'll give it you through the navel and it will take three months to get you well enough to walk. But you'll get well. So you can walk to the nice new gas chamber up in Quentin."
He said: "Go - yourself." His hand moved inside the jerkin. I pressed harder on his stomach. He let out a long soft sigh, took his hand away from the jerkin and let it fall limp at his side. His wide shoulders sagged.
"What you want?" he whispered.
I reached inside the jerkin and plucked out the automatic.
"Get into my car, kid." He stepped past me and I crowded him from behind. He got into the car. "Under the wheel, kid. You drive."
He slid under the wheel and I got into the car beside him. I said:
"Let the prowl car pass up the hill. They'll think we moved over when we heard the siren. Then turn her down hill and we'll go home."
I put Carmen's gun away and leaned the automatic against the boy's ribs. I looked back through the window. The whine of the siren was very loud now. Two red lights swelled in the middle of the street. They grew larger and blended into one and the car rushed by in a wild flurry of sound.
"Let's go," I said.
The boy swung the car and started off down the hill.
"Let's go home," I said. "To Laverne Terrace."
His smooth lips twitched. He swung the car west on Franklin.
"You're a simple-minded lad. What's your name?"
"Carol Lundgren," he said lifelessly.
"You shot the wrong guy, Carol. Joe Brody didn't kill your queen."
He spoke three words to me and kept on driving.
A moon half gone from the full glowed through a ring of mist among the high branches of the eucalyptus trees on Laverne Terrace. A radio sounded loudly from a house low down the hill. The boy swung the car over to the box hedge in front of Geiger's house, killed the motor and sat looking straight before him with both hands on the wheel. No light showed through Geiger's hedge.
I said: "Anybody home, son?"
"You ought to know."
"How would I know."
"Go - yourself."
"That's how people get false teeth."
He showed me his in a tight grin. Then he kicked the door open and got out. I scuttled out after him. He stood with his fists on his hips, looking silently at the house above the top of the hedge.
"All right," I said. "You have a key. Let's go on in."
"Who said I had a key?"
"Don't kid me, son. The fag gave you one. You've got a nice clean manly little room in there. He shooed you out and locked it up when he had lady visitors. He was like Caesar, a husband to women and a wife to men. Think I can't figure people like him and you out?"
I still held his automatic more or less pointed at him, but he swung on me just the same. It caught me flush on the chin. I backstepped fast enough to keep from falling, but I took plenty of the punch. It was meant to be a hard one, but a pansy has no iron in his bones, whatever he looks like.
I threw the gun down at the kid's feet and said:
"Maybe you need this."
He stooped for it like a flash. There was nothing slow about his movements. I sank a fist in the side of his neck. He toppled over sideways, clawing for the gun and not reaching it. I picked it up again and threw it in the car. The boy came up on all fours, leering with his eyes too wide open. He coughed and shook his head.
"You don't want to fight," I told him. "You're giving away too much weight."
He wanted to fight. He shot at me like a plane from a catapult, reaching for my knees in a diving tackle. I sidestepped and reached for his neck and took it into chancery. He scraped the dirt hard and got his feet under him enough to use his hands on me where it hurt. I twisted him around and heaved him a little higher. I took hold of my right wrist with my left hand and turned my right hipbone into him and for a moment it was a balance of weights. We seemed to hang there in the misty moonlight, two grotesque creatures whose feet scraped on the road and whose breath panted with effort.
I had my right forearm against his windpipe now and all the strength of both arms in it. His feet began a frenetic shuffle and he wasn't panting any more. He was ironbound. His left foot sprawled off to one side and the knee went slack. I held on half a minute longer. He sagged on my arm, an enormous weight I could hardly hold up. Then I let go. He sprawled at my feet, out cold. I went to the car and got a pair of handcuffs out of the glove compartment and twisted his wrists behind him and snapped them on. I lifted him by the armpits and managed to drag him in behind the hedge, out of sight from the street. I went back to the car and moved it a hundred feet up the hill and locked it.
He was still out when I got back. I unlocked the door, dragged him into the house, shut the door. He was beginning to gasp now. I switched a lamp on. His eyes fluttered open and focused on me slowly.
I bent down, keeping out of the way of his knees and said:
"Keep quiet or you'll get the same and more of it. Just lie quiet and hold your breath. Hold it until you can't hold it any longer and then tell yourself that you have to breathe, that you're black in the face, that your eyeballs are popping out, and that you're going to breathe right now, but that you're sitting strapped in the chair in the clean little gas chamber up in San Quentin and when you take that breath you're fighting with all your soul not to take it, it won't be air you'll get, it will be cyanide fumes. And that's what they call humane execution in our state now."
"Go - yourself," he said with a soft stricken sigh.
"You're going to cop a plea, brother, don't ever think you're not. And you're going to say just what we want you to say and nothing we don't want you to say."
"Go - yourself."
"Say that again and I'll put a pillow under your head."
His mouth twitched. I left him lying on the floor with his wrists shackled behind him and his cheek pressed into the rug and an animal brightness in his visible eye. I put on another lamp and stepped into the hallway at the back of the living room. Geiger's bedroom didn't seem to have been touched. I opened the door, not locked now, of the bedroom across the hall from it. There was a dim flickering light in the room and a smell of sandalwood. Two cones of incense ash stood side by side on a small brass tray on the bureau. The light came from the two tall black candles in the foot-high candlesticks. They were standing on straight-backed chairs, one on either side of the bed.
Geiger lay on the bed. The two missing strips of Chinese tapestry made a St. Andrew's Cross over the middle of his body, hiding the blood-smeared front of his Chinese coat. Below the cross his black-pajama'd legs lay stiff and straight. His feet were in the slippers with thick white felt soles. Above the cross his arms were crossed at the wrists and his hands lay flat against his shoulders, palms down, fingers close together and stretched out evenly. His mouth was closed and his Charlie Chan moustache was as unreal as a toupee. His broad nose was pinched and white. His eyes were almost closed, but not entirely. The faint glitter of his glass eye caught the light and winked at me. I didn't touch him. I didn't go very near him. He would be as cold as ice and as stiff as a board.
The black candles guttered in the draft from the open door. Drops of black wax crawled down their sides. The air of the room was poisonous and unreal. I went out and shut the door again and went back to the living room. The boy hadn't moved. I stood still, listening for sirens. It was all a question of how soon Agnes talked and what she said. If she talked about Geiger, the police would be there any minute. But she might not talk for hours. She might even have got away.
I looked down at the boy.
"Want to sit up, son?"
He closed his eye and pretended to go to sleep. I went over to the desk and scooped up the mulberry-colored phone and dialed Bernie Ohls' office. He had left to go home at six o'clock. I dialed the number of his home. He was there.
"This is Marlowe," I said. "Did your boys find a revolver on Owen Taylor this morning?"
I could hear him clearing his throat and then I could hear him trying to keep the surprise out of his voice.
"That would come under the heading of police business," he said.
"If they did, it had three empty shells in it."
"How the hell did you know that?" Ohls asked quietly.
"Come over to 7244 Laverne Terrace, off Laurel Canyon Boulevard. I'll show you where the slugs went."
"Just like that, huh?"
"Just like that."
Ohls said: "Look out the window and you'll see me coming round the corner. I thought you acted a little cagey on that one."
"Cagey is no word for it," I said.
Ohls stood looking down at the boy. The boy sat on the couch leaning sideways against the wall. Ohls looked at him silently, his pale eyebrows bristling and stiff and round like the little vegetable brushes the Fuller Brush man gives away.
He asked the boy: "Do you admit shooting Brody?"
The boy said his favorite three words in a muffled voice.
Ohls sighed and looked at me.
I said: "He doesn't have to admit that. I have his gun."
Ohls said: "I wish to Christ I had a dollar for every time I've had that said to me. What's funny about it?"
"It's not meant to be funny," I said.
"Well, that's something," Ohls said. He turned away. "I've called Wilde. We'll go over and see him and take this punk. He can ride with me and you can follow on behind in case he tries to kick me in the face."
"How do you like what's in the bedroom?"
"I like it fine," Ohls said. "I'm kind of glad that Taylor kid went off the pier. I'd hate to have to help send him to the deathhouse for rubbing that skunk."
I went back into the small bedroom and blew out the black candles and let them smoke. When I got back to the living room Ohls had the boy up on his feet. The boy stood glaring at him with sharp black eyes in a face as hard and white as cold mutton fat.
"Let's go," Ohls said and took him by the arm as if he didn't like touching him.
I put the lamps out and followed them out of the house. We got into our cars and I followed Ohls' twin tail-lights down the long curving hill. I hoped this would be my last trip to Laverne Terrace.
Taggart Wilde, the District Attorney, lived at the corner of Fourth and Lafayette Park, in a white frame house the size of a carbarn, with a red sandstone porte-cochere built on to one side and a couple of acres of soft rolling lawn in front. It was one of those solid old-fashioned houses which it used to be the thing to move bodily to new locations as the city grew westward. Wilde came of an old Los Angeles family and had probably been born in the house when it was on West Adams or Figueroa or St. James Park.
There were two cars in the driveway already, a big private sedan and a police car with a uniformed chauffeur who leaned smoking against his rear fender and admired the moon. Ohls went over and spoke to him and the chauffeur looked in at the boy in Ohls' car.
We went up to the house and rang the bell. A slick-haired blond man opened the door and led us down the hall and through a huge sunken living room crowded with heavy dark furniture and along another hall on the far side of it. He knocked at a door and stepped inside, then held the door wide and we went into a paneled study with an open French door at the end and a view of dark garden and mysterious trees. A smell of wet earth and flowers came in at the window. There were large dim oils on the walls, easy chairs, books, a smell of good cigar smoke which blended with the smell of wet earth and flowers.
Taggart Wilde sat behind a desk, a middle-aged plump man with clear blue eyes that managed to have a friendly expression without really having any expression at all. He had a cup of black coffee in front of him and he held a dappled thin cigar between the neat careful fingers of his left hand.
Another man sat at the corner of the desk in a blue leather chair, a cold-eyed hatchet-faced man, as lean as a rake and as hard as the manager of a loan office. His neat well-kept face looked as if it had been shaved within the hour. He wore a well-pressed brown suit and there was a black pearl in his tie. He had the long nervous fingers of a man with a quick brain. He looked ready for a fight.
Ohls pulled a chair up and sat down and said:
"Evening, Cronjager. Meet Phil Marlowe, a private eye who's in a jam." Ohls grinned.
Cronjager looked at me without nodding. He looked me over as if he was looking at a photograph. Then he nodded his chin about an inch. Wilde said:
"Sit down, Marlowe. I'll try to handle Captain Cronjager, but you know how it is. This is a big city now."
I sat down and lit a cigarette. Ohls looked at Cronjager and asked:
"What did you get on the Randall Place killing?"
The hatchet-faced man pulled one of his fingers until the knuckle cracked. He spoke without looking up.
"A stiff, two slugs in him. Two guns that hadn't been fired. Down on the street we got a blonde trying to start a car that didn't belong to her. Hers was right next to it, the same model. She acted rattled so the boys brought her in and she spilled. She was in there when this guy Brody got it. Claims she didn't see the killer."
"That all?" Ohls asked.
Cronjager raised his eyebrows a little. "Only happened about an hour ago. What did you expect - moving pictures of the killing?"
"Maybe a description of the killer," Ohls said.
"A tall guy in a leather jerkin - if you call that a description."
"He's outside in my heap," Ohls said. "Handcuffed. Marlowe put the arm on him for you. Here's his gun." Ohls took the boy's automatic out of his pocket and laid it on a corner of Wilde's desk. Cronjager looked at the gun but didn't reach for it.
Wilde chuckled. He was leaning back and puffing his dappled cigar without letting go of it. He bent forward to sip from his coffee cup. He took a silk handkerchief from the breast pocket of the dinner jacket he was wearing and touched his lips with it and tucked it away again.
"There's a couple more deaths involved," Ohls said, pinching the soft flesh at the end of his chin.
Cronjager stiffened visibly. His surly eyes became points of steely light.
Ohls said:
"You heard about a car being lifted out of the Pacific Ocean off Lido pier this a.m. with a dead guy in it?"
Cronjager said: "No," and kept on looking nasty.
"The dead guy in the car was chauffeur to a rich family," Ohls said. "The family was being blackmailed on account of one of the daughters. Mr. Wilde recommended Marlowe to the family, through me. Marlowe played it kind of close to the vest."
"I love private dicks that play murders close to the vest," Cronjager snarled. "You don't have to be so goddamned coy about it."
"Yeah," Ohls said. "I don't have to be so goddamned coy about it. It's not so goddamned often I get a chance to be coy with a city copper. I spend most of my time telling them where to put their feet so they won't break an ankle."
Cronjager whitened around the corners of his sharp nose. His breath made a soft hissing sound in the quiet room. He said very quietly:
"You haven't had to tell any of my men where to put their feet, smart guy."
"We'll see about that," Ohls said. "This chauffeur I spoke of that's drowned off Lido shot a guy last night in your territory. A guy named Geiger who ran a dirty book racket in a store on Hollywood Boulevard. Geiger was living with the punk I got outside in my car. I mean living with him, if you get the idea."
Cronjager was staring at him levelly now.
"That sounds like it might grow up to be a dirty story," he said.
"It's my experience most police stories are," Ohls growled and turned to me, his eyebrows bristling. "You're on the air, Marlowe. Give it to him."
I gave it to him.
I left out two things, not knowing just why, at the moment, I left out one of them. I left out Carmen's visit to Brody's apartment and Eddie Mars' visit to Geiger's in the afternoon. I told the rest of it just as it happened.
Cronjager never took his eyes off my face and no expression of any kind crossed his as I talked. At the end of it he was perfectly silent for a long minute. Wilde was silent, sipping his coffee, puffing gently at his dappled cigar. Ohls stared at one of his thumbs.
Cronjager leaned slowly back in his chair and crossed one ankle over his knee and rubbed the ankle bone with his thin nervous hand. His lean face wore a harsh frown. He said with deadly politeness:
"So all you did was not report a murder that happened last night and then spend today foxing around so that this kid of Geiger's could commit a second murder this evening."
"That's all," I said. "I was in a pretty tough spot. I guess I did wrong, but I wanted to protect my client and I hadn't any reason to think the boy would go gunning for Brody."
"That kind of thinking is police business, Marlowe. If Geiger's death had been reported last night, the books could never have been moved from the store to Brody's apartment. The kid wouldn't have been led to Brody and wouldn't have killed him. Say Brody was living on borrowed time. His kind usually are. But a life is a life."
"Right," I said. "Tell that to your coppers next time they shoot down some scared petty larceny crook running away up an alley with a stolen spare."
Wilde put both his hands down on his desk with a solid smack.
"That's enough of that," he snapped. "What makes you so sure, Marlowe, that this Taylor boy shot Geiger? Even if the gun that killed Geiger was found on Taylor's body or in the car, it doesn't absolutely follow that he was the killer. The gun might have been planted - say by Brody, the actual killer."
"It's physically possible," I said, "but morally impossible. It assumes too much coincidence and too much that's out of character for Brody and his girl, and out of character for what he was trying to do. I talked to Brody for a long time. He was a crook, but not a killer type. He had two guns, but he wasn't wearing either of them. He was trying to find a way to cut in on Geiger's racket, which naturally he knew all about from the girl. He says he was watching Geiger off and on to see if he had any tough backers. I believe him. To suppose he killed Geiger in order to get his books, then scrammed with the nude photo Geiger had just taken of Carmen Sternwood, then planted the gun on Owen Taylor and pushed Taylor into the ocean off Lido, is to suppose a hell of a lot too much. Taylor had the motive, jealous rage, and the opportunity to kill Geiger. He was out in one of the family cars without permission. He killed Geiger right in front of the girl, which Brody would never have done, even if he had been a killer. I can't see anybody with a purely commercial interest in Geiger doing that. But Taylor would have done it. The nude photo business was just what would have made him do it."
Wilde chuckled and looked along his eyes at Cronjager. Cronjager cleared his throat with a snort. Wilde asked:
"What's this business about hiding the body? I don't see the point of that."
I said: "The kid hasn't told us, but he must have done it. Brody wouldn't have gone into the house after Geiger was shot. The boy must have got home when I was away taking Carmen to her house. He was afraid of the police, of course, being what he is, and he probably thought it a good idea to have the body hidden until he had removed his effects from the house. He dragged it out of the front door, judging by the marks on the rug, and very likely put it in the garage. Then he packed up whatever belongings he had there and took them away. And later on, sometime in the night and before the body stiffened, he had a revulsion of feeling and thought he hadn't treated his dead friend very nicely. So he went back and laid him out on the bed. That's all guessing, of course."
Wilde nodded.
"Then this morning he goes down to the store as if nothing had happened and keeps his eyes open. And when Brody moved the books out he found out where they were going and assumed that whoever got them had killed Geiger just for that purpose. He may even have known more about Brody and the girl than they suspected. What do you think, Ohls?"
Ohls said: "We'll find out - but that doesn't help Cronjager's troubles. What's eating him is all this happened last night and he's only just been rung in on it."
Cronjager said sourly: "I think I can find some way to deal with that angle too." He looked at me sharply and immediately looked away again.
Wilde waved his cigar and said:
"Let's see the exhibits, Marlowe."
I emptied my pockets and put the catch on his desk: the three notes and Geiger's card to General Sternwood, Carmen's photos, and the blue notebook with the code list of names and addresses. I had already given Geiger's keys to Ohls.
Wilde looked at what I gave him, puffing gently at his cigar. Ohls lit one of his own toy cigars and blew smoke peacefully at the ceiling. Cronjager leaned on the desk and looked at what I had given Wilde.
Wilde tapped the three notes signed by Carmen and said:
"I guess these were just a come-on. If General Sternwood paid them, it would be through fear of something worse. Then Geiger would have tightened the screws. Do you know what he was afraid of?" He was looking at me.
I shook my head.
"Have you told your story complete in all relevant details?"
"I left out a couple of personal matters. I intend to keep on leaving them out, Mr. Wilde."
Cronjager said: "Hah!" and snorted with deep feeling.
"Why?" Wilde asked quietly.
"Because my client is entitled to that protection, short of anything but a Grand Jury. I have a license to operate as a private detective. I suppose that word 'private' has some meaning. The Hollywood Division has two murders on its hands, both solved. They have both killers. They have the motive, the instrument in each case. The blackmail angle has got to be suppressed, as far as the names of the parties are concerned."
"Why?" Wilde asked again.
"That's okey," Cronjager said dryly. "We're glad to stooge for a shamus of his standing."
I said: "I'll show you." I got up and went back out of the house to my car and got the book from Geiger's store out of it. The uniformed police driver was standing beside Ohls' car. The boy was inside it, leaning back sideways in the corner.
"Has he said anything?" I asked.
"He made a suggestion," the copper said and spat. "I'm letting it ride."
I went back into the house, put the book on Wilde's desk and opened up the wrappings. Cronjager was using a telephone on the end of the desk. He hung up and sat down as I came in.
Wilde looked through the book, wooden-faced, closed it and pushed it towards Cronjager. Cronjager opened it, looked at a page or two, shut it quickly. A couple of red spots the size of half dollars showed on his cheekbones.
I said: "Look at the stamped dates on the front endpaper."
Cronjager opened the book again and looked at them.
"Well?"
"If necessary," I said, "I'll testify under oath that that book came from Geiger's store. The blonde, Agnes, will admit what kind of business the store did. It's obvious to anybody with eyes that that store is just a front for something. But the Hollywood police allowed it to operate, for their own reasons. I dare say the Grand Jury would like to know what those reasons are."
Wilde grinned. He said:
"Grand Juries do ask those embarrassing questions sometimes - in a rather vain effort to find out just why cities are run as they are run."
Cronjager stood up suddenly and put his hat on.
"I'm one against three here," he snapped. "I'm a homicide man. If this Geiger was running indecent literature, that's no skin off my nose. But I'm ready to admit it won't help my division any to have it washed over in the papers. What do you birds want?"
Wilde looked at Ohls. Ohls said calmly:
"I want to turn a prisoner over to you. Let's go."
He stood up. Cronjager looked at him fiercely and stalked out of the room. Ohls went after him. The door closed again. Wilde tapped on his desk and stared at me with his clear blue eyes.
"You ought to understand how any copper would feel about a cover-up like this," he said. "You'll have to make statements of all of it - at least for the files. I think it may be possible to keep the two killings separate and to keep General Sternwood's name out of both of them. Do you know why I'm not tearing your ear off?"
"No. I expected to get both ears torn off."
"What are you getting for it all?"
"Twenty-five dollars a day and expenses."
"That would make fifty dollars and a little gasoline so far."
"About that."
He put his head on one side and rubbed the back of his left little finger along the lower edge of his chin.
"And for that amount of money you're willing to get yourself in Dutch with half the law enforcement of this county?"
"I don't like it," I said. "But what the hell am I to do? I'm on a case. I'm selling what I have to sell to make a living. What little guts and intelligence the Lord gave me and a willingness to get pushed around in order to protect a client. It's against my principles to tell as much as I've told tonight, without consulting the General. As for the cover-up, I've been in police business myself, as you know. They come a dime a dozen in any big city. Cops get very large and emphatic when an outsider tries to hide anything, but they do the same things themselves every other day, to oblige their friends or anybody with a little pull. And I'm not through. I'm still on the case. I'd do the same thing again, if I had to."
"Providing Cronjager doesn't get your license," Wilde grinned. "You said you held back a couple of personal matters. Of what import?"
"I'm still on the case," I said, and stared straight into his eyes.
Wilde smiled at me. He had the frank daring smile of an Irishman.
"Let me tell you something, son. My father was a close friend of old Sternwood. I've done all my office permits - and maybe a good deal more - to save the old man from grief. But in the long run it can't be done. Those girls of his are bound certain to hook up with something that can't be hushed, especially that little blonde brat. They ought not to be running around loose. I blame the old man for that. I guess he doesn't realize what the world is today. And there's another thing I might mention while we're talking man to man and I don't have to growl at you. I'll bet a dollar to a Canadian dime that the General's afraid his son-in-law, the ex-bootlegger, is mixed up in this somewhere, and what he really hoped you would find out is that he isn't. What do you think of that?"
"Regan didn't sound like a blackmailer, what I heard of him. He had a soft spot where he was and he walked out on it."
Wilde snorted. "The softness of that spot neither you nor I could judge. If he was a certain sort of man, it would not have been so very soft. Did the General tell you he was looking for Regan?"
"He told me he wished he knew where he was and that he was all right. He liked Regan and was hurt the way he bounced off without telling the old man good-by."
Wilde leaned back and frowned.
"I see," he said in a changed voice. His hand moved the stuff on his desk around, laid Geiger's blue notebook to one side and pushed the other exhibits toward me.
"You may as well take these," he said. "I've no further use for them."
It was close to eleven when I put my car away and walked around to the front of the Hobart Arms. The plate-glass door was put on the lock at ten, so I had to get my keys out. Inside, in the square barren lobby, a man put a green evening paper down beside a potted palm and flicked a cigarette butt into the tub the palm grew in. He stood up and waved his hat at me and said:
"The boss wants to talk to you. You sure keep your friends waiting, pal."
I stood still and looked at his flattened nose and club steak ear.
"What about?"
"What do you care? Just keep your nose clean and everything will be jake." His hand hovered near the upper buttonhole of his open coat.
"I smell of policemen," I said. "I'm too tired to talk, too tired to eat, too tired to think. But if you think I'm not too tired to take orders from Eddie Mars - try getting your gat out before I shoot your good ear off."
"Nuts. You ain't got no gun." He stared at me levelly. His dark wiry brows closed in together and his mouth made a downward curve.
"That was then," I told him. "I'm not always naked."
He waved his left hand.
"Okey. You win. I wasn't told to blast anybody. You'll hear from him."
"Too late will be too soon," I said, and turned slowly as he passed me on his way to the door. He opened it and went out without looking back. I grinned at my own foolishness, went along to the elevator and upstairs to the apartment. I took Carmen's little gun out of my pocket and laughed at it. Then I cleaned it thoroughly, oiled it, wrapped it in a piece of canton flannel and locked it up. I made myself a drink and was drinking it when the phone rang. I sat down beside the table on which it stood.
"So you're tough tonight," Eddie Mars' voice said.
"Big, fast, tough and full of prickles. What can I do for you?"
"Cops over there - you know where. You keep me out of it?"
"Why should I?"
"I'm nice to be nice to, soldier. I'm not nice not to be nice to."
"Listen hard and you'll hear my teeth chattering."
He laughed dryly.
"Did you - or did you?"
"I did. I'm damned if I know why. I guess it was just complicated enough without you."
"Thanks, soldier. Who gunned him?"
"Read it in the paper tomorrow - maybe."
"I want to know now."
"Do you get everything you want?"
"No. Is that an answer, soldier?"
"Somebody you never heard of gunned him. Let it go at that."
"If that's on the level, someday I may be able to do you a favor."
"Hang up and let me go to bed."
He laughed again.
"You're looking for Rusty Regan, aren't you?"
"A lot of people seem to think I am, but I'm not."
"If you were, I could give you an idea. Drop in and see me down at the beach. Any time. Glad to see you."
"Maybe."
"Be seeing you then." The phone clicked and I sat holding it with a savage patience. Then I dialed the Sternwoods' number and heard it ring four or five times and then the butler's suave voice saying:
"General Sternwood's residence."
"This is Marlowe. Remember me? I met you about a hundred years ago - or was it yesterday?"
"Yes, Mr. Marlowe. I remember, of course."
"Is Mrs. Regan home?"
"Yes, I believe so. Would you -"
I cut in on him with a sudden change of mind.
"No. You give her the message. Tell her I have the pictures, all of them, and that everything is all right."
"Yes... yes..." The voice seemed to shake a little. "You have the pictures - all of them - and everything is all right... Yes, sir. I may say - thank you very much, sir."
The phone rang back in five minutes. I had finished my drink and it made me feel as if I could eat the dinner I had forgotten all about; I went out leaving the telephone ringing. It was ringing when I came back; It rang at intervals until half-past twelve. At that time I put my lights out and opened the windows up and muffled the phone bell with a piece of paper and went to bed. I had a bellyful of the Sternwood family.
I read all three of the morning papers over my eggs and bacon the next morning. Their accounts of the affair came as close to the truth as newspaper stories usually come - as close as Mars is to Saturn. None of the three connected Owen Taylor, driver of the Lido Pier Suicide Car, with the Laurel Canyon Exotic Bungalow Slaying. None of them mentioned the Sternwoods, Bernie Ohls or me. Owen Taylor was "chauffeur to a wealthy family." Captain Cronjager of the Hollywood Division got all the credit for solving the two slayings in his district, which were supposed to arise out of a dispute over the proceeds from a wire service maintained by one Geiger in the back of the bookstore on Hollywood Boulevard. Brody had shot Geiger and Carol Lundgren had shot Brody in revenge. Police were holding Carol Lundgren in custody. He had confessed. He had a bad record - probably in high school. Police were also holding one Agnes Lozelle, Geiger's secretary, as a material witness.
It was a nice write-up. It gave the impression that Geiger had been killed the night before, that Brody had been killed about an hour later, and that Captain Cronjager had solved both murders while lighting a cigarette. The suicide of Taylor made Page One of Section II. There was a photo of the sedan on the deck of the power lighter, with the license plate blacked out, and something covered with a cloth lying on the deck beside the running board. Owen Taylor had been despondent and in poor health. His family lived in uque, and his body would be shipped there. There would be no inquest.
Captain Gregory of the Missing' Persons Bureau laid my card down on his wide flat desk and arranged it so that its edges exactly paralleled the edges of the desk. He studied it with his head on one side, grunted, swung around in his swivel chair and looked out of his window at the barred top floor of the Hall of Justice half a block away. He was a burly man with tired eyes and the slow deliberate movements of a night watchman. His voice was toneless, flat and uninterested.
"Private dick, eh?" he said, not looking at me at all, but looking out of his window. Smoke wisped from the blackened bowl of a briar that hung on his eye tooth.
"What can I do for you?"
"I'm working for General Guy Sternwood, 3765 Alta Brea Crescent, West Hollywood."
Captain Gregory blew a little smoke from the corner of his mouth without removing the pipe.
"On what?"
"Not exactly on what you're working on, but I'm interested. I thought you could help me."
"Help you on what?"
"General Sternwood's a rich man," I said. "He's an old friend of the D.A.'s father. If he wants to hire a full-time boy to run errands for him, that's no reflection on the police. It's just a luxury he is able to afford himself."
"What makes you think I'm doing anything for him?"
I didn't answer that. He swung around slowly and heavily in his swivel chair and put his large feet flat on the bare linoleum that covered his floor. His office had the musty smell of years of routine. He stared at me bleakly.
"I don't want to waste your time, Captain," I said and pushed my chair back - about four inches.
He didn't move. He kept on staring at me out of his washed-out tired eyes.
"You know the D.A.?"
"I've met him. I worked for him once. I know Bernie Ohls, his chief investigator, pretty well."
Captain Gregory reached for a phone and mumbled into it:
"Get me Ohls at the D.A.'s office." He sat holding the phone down on its cradle. Moments passed. Smoke drifted from his pipe. His eyes were heavy and motionless like his hand. The bell tinkled and he reached for my card with his left hand. "Ohls?... Al Gregory at headquarters. A guy named Philip Marlowe is in my office. His card says he's a private investigator. He wants information from me... Yeah? What does he look like?... Okey, thanks."
He dropped the phone and took his pipe out of his mouth and tamped the tobacco with the brass cap of a heavy pencil. He did it carefully and solemnly, as if that was as important as anything he would have to do that day. He leaned back and stared at me some more.
"What you want?"
"An idea of what progress you're making, if any."
He thought that over.
"Regan?" he asked finally.
"Sure."
"Know him?"
"I never saw him. I hear he's a good-looking Irishman in his late thirties, that he was once in the liquor racket, that he married General Sternwood's older daughter and that they didn't click. I'm told he disappeared about a month back."
"Sternwood oughta think himself lucky instead of hiring private talent to beat around in the tall grass."
"The General took a big fancy to him. Such things happen. The old man is crippled and lonely. Regan used to sit around with him and keep him company."
"What you think you can do that we can't do?"
"Nothing at all, in so far as finding Regan goes. But there's a rather mysterious blackmail angle. I want to make sure Regan isn't involved. Knowing where he is or isn't might help."
"Brother, I'd like to help you, but I don't know where he is. He pulled down the curtain and that's that."
"Pretty hard to do against your organization, isn't it, Captain?"
"Yeah - but it can be done - for a while." He touched a bell button on the side of his desk. A middle-aged woman put her head in at a side door. "Get me the file on Terence Regan, Abba."
The door closed. Captain Gregory and I looked at each other in some more heavy silence. The door opened again and the woman put a tabbed green file on his desk. Captain Gregory nodded her out, put a pair of heavy horn-rimmed glasses on his veined nose and turned the papers in the file over slowly. I rolled a cigarette around in my fingers.
"He blew on the 16th of September," he said. "The only thing important about that is it was the chauffeur's day off and nobody saw Regan take his car out. It was late afternoon, though. We found the car four days later in a garage belonging to a ritzy bungalow court place near the Sunset Towers. A garage man reported it to the stolen car detail, said it didn't belong there. The place is called the Casa de Oro. There's an angle to that I'll tell you about in a minute. We couldn't find out anything about who put the car in there. We print the car but don't find any prints that are on file anywhere. The car in that garage don't jibe with foul play, although there's a reason to suspect foul play. It jibes with something else I'll tell you about in a minute."
I said: "That jibes with Eddie Mars' wife being on the missing list."
He looked annoyed.
"Yeah. We investigate the tenants and find she's living there. Left about the time Regan did, within two days anyway. A guy who sounds a bit like Regan had been seen with her, but we don't get a positive identification. It's goddamned funny in this police racket how an old woman can look out of a window and see a guy running and pick him out of a line-up six months later, but we can show hotel help a clear photo and they just can't be sure."
"That's one of the qualifications for good hotel help," I said.
"Yeah. Eddie Mars and his wife didn't live together, but they were friendly, Eddie says. Here's some of the possibilities. First off Regan carried fifteen grand, packed it in his clothes all the time. Real money, they tell me. Not just a top card and a bunch of hay. That's a lot of jack but this Regan might be the boy to have it around so he could take it out and look at it when somebody was looking at him. Then again maybe he wouldn't give a damn. His wife says he never made a nickel off of old man Sternwood except room and board and a Packard 120 his wife gave him. Tie that for an ex-legger in the rich gravy."
"It beats me," I said.
"Well, here we are with a guy who ducks out and has fifteen grand in his pants and folks know it. Well, that's money. I might duck out myself, if I had fifteen grand, and me with two kids in high school. So the first thought is somebody rolls him for it and rolls him too hard, so they have to take him out in the desert and plant him among the cactuses. But I don't like that too well. Regan carried a gat and had plenty of experience using it, and not just in a greasy-faced liquor mob. I understand he commanded a whole brigade in the Irish troubles back in 1922 or whenever it was. A guy like that wouldn't be white meat to a heister. Then, his car being in that garage makes whoever rolled him know he was sweet on Eddie Mars' wife, which he was, I guess, but it ain't something every poolroom bum would know."
"Got a photo?" I asked.
"Him, not her. That's funny too. There's a lot of funny angles to this case. Here." He pushed a shiny print across the desk and I looked at an Irish face that was more sad than merry and more reserved than brash. Not the face of a tough guy and not the face of a man who could be pushed around much by anybody. Straight dark brows with strong bone under them. A forehead wide rather than high, a mat of dark clustering hair, a thin short nose, a wide mouth. A chin that had strong lines but was small for the mouth. A face that looked a little taut, the face of a man who would move fast and play for keeps. I passed the print back. I would know that face, if I saw it.
Captain Gregory knocked his pipe out and refilled it and tamped the tobacco down with his thumb. He lit it, blew smoke and began to talk again.
"Well, there could be people who would know he was sweet on Eddie Mars' frau. Besides Eddie himself. For a wonder he knew it. But he don't seem to give a damn. We checked him pretty thoroughly around that time. Of course Eddie wouldn't have knocked him off out of jealousy. The set-up would point to him too obvious."
"It depends how smart he is," I said. "He might try the double bluff."
Captain Gregory shook his head.
"If he's smart enough to get by in his racket, he's too smart for that. I get your idea. He pulls the dumb play because he thinks we wouldn't expect him to pull the dumb play. From a police angle that's wrong. Because he'd have us in his hair so much it would interfere with his business. You might think a dumb play would be smart. I might think so. The rank and file wouldn't. They'd make his life miserable. I've ruled it out. If I'm wrong, you can prove it on me and I'll eat my chair cushion. Till then I'm leaving Eddie in the clear. Jealousy is a bad motive for his type. Top-flight racketeers have business brains. They learn to do things that are good policy and let their personal feelings take care of themselves. I'm leaving that out."
"What are you leaving in?"
"The dame and Regan himself. Nobody else. She was a blonde then, but she won't be now. We don't find her car, so they probably left in it. They had a long start on us - fourteen days. Except for that car of Regan's I don't figure we'd have got the case at all. Of course I'm used to them that way, especially in good-class families. And of course everything I've done has had to be under the hat." He leaned back and thumped the arms of his chair with the heels of his large heavy hands. "I don't see nothing to do but wait," he said. "We've got readers out, but it's too soon to look for results. Regan had fifteen grand we know of. The girl had some, maybe a lot in rocks. But they'll run out of dough some day. Regan will cash a check, drop a marker, write a letter. They're in a strange town and they've got new names, but they've got the same old appetites. They got to get back in the fiscal system."
"What did the girl do before she married Eddie Mars?"
"Torcher."
"Can't you get any old professional photos?"
"No. Eddie must of had some, but he won't loosen up. He wants her let alone. I can't make him. He's got friends in town, or he wouldn't be what he is." He grunted. "Any of this do you any good?"
I said: "You'll never find either of them. The Pacific Ocean is too close."
"What I said about my chair cushion still goes. We'll find him. It may take time. It could take a year or two."
"General Sternwood may not live that long," I said.
"We've done all we could, brother. If he wants to put out a reward and spend some money, we might get results. The city don't give me the kind of money it takes." His large eyes peered at me and his scratchy eyebrows moved. "You serious about thinking Eddie put them both down?"
I laughed. "No. I was just kidding. I think what you think, Captain. That Regan ran away with a woman who meant more to him than a rich wife he didn't get along with. Besides, she isn't rich yet."
"You met her, I suppose?"
"Yes. She'd make a jazzy week-end, but she'd be wearing for a steady diet."
He grunted and I thanked him for his time and information and left. A gray Plymouth sedan tailed me away from the City Hall. I gave it a chance to catch up with me on a quiet street. It refused the offer, so I shook it off and went about my business.
I didn't go near the Sternwood family. I went back to the office and sat in my swivel chair and tried to catch up on my foot-dangling. There was a gusty wind blowing in at the windows and the soot from the oil burners of the hotel next door was down-drafted into the room and rolling across the top of the desk like tumbleweed drifting across a vacant lot. I was thinking about going out to lunch and that life was pretty flat and that it would probably be just as flat if I took a drink and that taking a drink all alone at that time of day wouldn't be any fun anyway. I was thinking this when Norris called up. In his carefully polite manner he said that General Sternwood was not feeling very well and that certain items in the newspaper had been read to him and he assumed that my investigation was now completed.
"Yes, as regards Geiger," I said. "I didn't shoot him, you know."
"The General didn't suppose you did, Mr. Marlowe."
"Does the General know anything about those photographs Mrs. Regan was worrying about?"
"No, sir. Decidedly not."
"Did you know what the General gave me?"
"Yes, sir. Three notes and a card, I believe."
"Right. I'll return them. As to the photos I think I'd better just destroy them."
"Very good, sir. Mrs. Regan tried to reach you a number of times last night -"
"I was out getting drunk," I said.
"Yes. Very necessary, sir, I'm sure. The General has instructed me to send you a check for five hundred dollars. Will that be satisfactory?"
"More than generous," I said.
"And I presume we may now consider the incident closed?"
"Oh sure. Tight as a vault with a busted time lock."
"Thank you, sir. I am sure we all appreciate it. When the General is feeling a little better - possibly tomorrow - he would like to thank you in person."
"Fine," I said. "I'll come out and drink some more of his brandy, maybe with champagne."
"I shall see that some is properly iced," the old boy said, almost with a smirk in his voice.
That was that. We said good-by and hung up. The coffee shop smell from next door came in at the windows with the soot but failed to make me hungry. So I got out my office bottle and took the drink and let my self-respect ride its own race.
I counted it up on my fingers. Rusty Regan had run away from a lot of money and a handsome wife to go wandering with a vague blonde who was more or less married to a racketeer named Eddie Mars. He had gone suddenly without good-bys and there might be any number of reasons for that. The General had been too proud, or, at the first interview he gave me, too careful, to tell me the Missing Persons Bureau had the matter in hand. The Missing Persons people were dead on their feet on it and evidently didn't think it worth bothering over. Regan had done what he had done and that was his business. I agreed with Captain Gregory that Eddie Mars would have been very unlikely to involve himself in a double murder just because another man had gone to town with the blonde he was not even living with. It might have annoyed him, but business is business, and you have to hold your teeth clamped around Hollywood to keep from chewing on stray blondes. If there had been a lot of money involved, that would be different. But fifteen grand wouldn't be a lot of money to Eddie Mars. He was no two-bit chiseler like Brody.
Geiger was dead and Carmen would have to find some other shady character to drink exotic blends of hootch with. I didn't suppose she would have any trouble. All she would have to do would be to stand on the corner for five minutes and look coy. I hoped that the next grifter who dropped the hook on her would play her a little more smoothly, a little more for the long haul rather than the quick touch.
Mrs. Regan knew Eddie Mars well enough to borrow money from him. That was natural, if she played roulette and was a good loser. Any gambling house owner would lend a good client money in a pinch. Apart from this they had an added bond of interest in Regan. He was her husband and he had gone off with Eddie Mars' wife.
Carol Lundgren, the boy killer with the limited vocabulary, was out of circulation for a long, long time, even if they didn't strap him in a chair over a bucket of acid. They wouldn't, because he would take a plea and save the county money. They all do when they don't have the price of a big lawyer. Agnes Lozelle was in custody as a material witness. They wouldn't need her for that, if Carol took a plea, and if he pleaded guilty on arraignment, they would turn her loose. They wouldn't want to open up any angles on Geiger's business, apart from which they had nothing on her.
That left me. I had concealed a murder and suppressed evidence for twenty-four hours, but I was still at large and had a five-hundred-dollar check coming. The smart thing for me to do was to take another drink and forget the whole mess.
That being the obviously smart thing to do, I called Eddie Mars and told him I was coming down to Las Olindas that evening to talk to him. That was how smart I was.
I got down there about nine, under a hard high October moon that lost itself in the top layers of a beach fog. The Cypress Club was at the far end of the town, a rambling frame mansion that had once been the summer residence of a rich man named De Cazens, and later had been a hotel. It was now a big dark outwardly shabby place in a thick grove of wind-twisted Monterey cypresses, which gave it its name. It had enormous scrolled porches, turrets all over the place, stained-glass trims around the big windows, big empty stables at the back, a general air of nostalgic decay. Eddie Mars had left the outside much as he had found it, instead of making it over to look like an MGM set. I left my car on a street with sputtering arc lights and walked into the grounds along a damp gravel path to the main entrance. A doorman in a doublebreasted guard's coat let me into a huge dim silent lobby from which a white oak staircase curved majestically up to the darkness of an upper floor. I checked my hat and coat and waited, listening to music and confused voices behind heavy double doors. They seemed a long way off, and not quite of the same world as the building itself. Then the slim pasty-faced blond man who had been with Eddie Mars and the pug at Geiger's place came through a door under the staircase, smiled at me bleakly and took me back with him along a carpeted hall to the boss's office.
This was a square room with a deep old bay window and a stone fireplace in which a fire of juniper logs burned lazily. It was wainscoted in walnut and had a frieze of faded damask above the paneling. The ceiling was high and remote. There was a smell of cold sea.
Eddie Mars' dark sheenless desk didn't belong in the room, but neither did anything made after 1900. His carpet had a Florida suntan. There was a bartop radio in the corner and a Sevres china tea set on a copper tray beside a samovar. I wondered who that was for. There was a door in the corner that had a time lock on it.
Eddie Mars grinned at me sociably and shook hands and moved his chin at the vault.
"I'm a pushover for a heist mob here except for that thing," he said cheerfully. "The local johns drop in every morning and watch me open it. I have an arrangement with them."
"You hinted you had something for me," I said. "What is it?"
"What's your hurry? Have a drink and sit down."
"No hurry at all. You and I haven't anything to talk about but business."
"You'll have the drink and like it," he said. He mixed a couple and put mine down beside a red leather chair and stood crosslegged against the desk himself, one hand in the side pocket of his midnight-blue dinner jacket, the thumb outside and the nail glistening. In dinner clothes he looked a little harder than in gray flannel, but he still looked like a horseman. We drank and nodded at each other.
"Ever been here before?" he asked.
"During prohibition. I don't get any kick out of gambling."
"Not with money," he smiled. "You ought to look in tonight. One of your friends is outside betting the wheels. I hear she's doing pretty well. Vivian Regan."
I sipped my drink and took one of his monogrammed cigarettes.
"I kind of liked the way you handled that yesterday," he said. "You made me sore at the time but I could see afterwards how right you were. You and I ought to get along. How much do I owe you?"
"For doing what?"
"Still careful, eh? I have my pipe line into headquarters, or I wouldn't be here. I get them the way they happen, not the way you read them in the papers." He showed me his large white teeth.
"How much have you got?" I asked.
"You're not talking money?"
"Information was the way I understood it."
"Information about what?"
"You have a short memory. Regan."
"Oh, that." He waved his glistening nails in the quiet light from one of those bronze lamps that shoot a beam at the ceiling. "I hear you got the information already. I felt I owed you a fee. I'm used to paying for nice treatment."
"I didn't drive down here to make a touch. I get paid for what I do. Not much by your standards, but I make out. One customer at a time is a good rule. You didn't bump Regan off, did you?"
"No. Did you think I did?"
"I wouldn't put it past you."
He laughed.
"You're kidding."
I laughed.
"Sure, I'm kidding. I never saw Regan, but I saw his photo. You haven't got the men for the work. And while we're on that subject don't send me any more gun punks with orders. I might get hysterical and blow one down."
He looked through his glass at the fire, set it down on the end of the desk and wiped his lips with a sheer lawn handkerchief.
"You talk a good game," he said. "But I dare say you can break a hundred and ten. You're not really interested in Regan, are you?"
"No, not professionally. I haven't been asked to be. But I know somebody who would like to know where he is."
"She doesn't give a damn," he said.
"I mean her father."
He wiped his lips again and looked at the handkerchief almost as if he expected to find blood on it. He drew his thick gray eyebrows close together and fingered the side of his weatherbeaten nose.
"Geiger was trying to blackmail the General," I said. "The General wouldn't say so, but I figure he was at least half scared Regan might be behind it."
Eddie Mars laughed.
"Uh-uh. Geiger worked that one on everybody. It was strictly his own idea. He'd get notes from people that looked legal - were legal, I dare say, except that he wouldn't have dared sue on them. He'd present the notes, with a nice flourish, leaving himself empty-handed. If he drew an ace, he had a prospect that scared and he went to work. If he didn't draw an ace, he just dropped the whole thing."
"Clever guy," I said. "He dropped it all right. Dropped it and fell on it. How come you know all this?"
He shrugged impatiently.
"I wish to Christ I didn't know half the stuff that's brought to me. Knowing other people's business is the worst investment a man can make in my circle. Then if it was just Geiger you were after, you're washed up on that angle."
"Washed up and paid off."
"I'm sorry about that. I wish old Sternwood would hire himself a soldier like you on a straight salary, to keep those girls of his home at least a few nights a week."
"Why?"
His mouth looked sulky.
"They're plain trouble. Take the dark one. She's a pain in the neck around here. If she loses, she plunges and I end up with a fistful of paper which nobody will discount at any price. She has no money of her own except an allowance and what's in the old man's will is a secret. If she wins, she takes my money home with her."
"You get it back the next night," I said.
"I get some of it back. But over a period of time I'm loser."
He looked earnestly at me, as if that was important to me. I wondered why he thought it necessary to tell me at all. I yawned and finished my drink.
"I'm going out and look the joint over," I said.
"Yes, do." He pointed to a door near the vault door. "That leads to a door behind the tables."
"I'd rather go in the way the suckers enter."
"Okey. As you please. We're friends, aren't we, soldier?"
"Sure." I stood up and we shook hands.
"Maybe I can do you a real favor some day," he said. "You got it all from Gregory this time."
"So you own a piece of him too."
"Oh not that bad. We're just friends."
I stared at him for a moment, then went over to the door I had come in at. I looked back at him when I had it open.
"You don't have anybody tailing me around in a gray Plymouth sedan, do you?"
His eyes widened sharply. He looked jarred.
"Hell, no. Why should I?"
"I couldn't imagine," I said, and went on out. I thought his surprise looked genuine enough to be believed. I thought he even looked a little worried. I couldn't think of any reason for that.
It was about ten-thirty when the little yellow-sashed Mexican orchestra got tired of playing a low-voiced, prettied-up rhumba that nobody was dancing to. The gourd player rubbed his finger tips together as if they were sore and got a cigarette into his mouth almost with the same movement. The other four, with a timed simultaneous stoop, reached under their chairs for glasses from which they sipped, smacking their lips and flashing their eyes. Tequila, their manner said. It was probably mineral water. The pretense was as wasted as the music. Nobody was looking at them.
The room had been a ballroom once and Eddie Mars had changed it only as much as his business compelled him. No chromium glitter, no indirect lighting from behind angular cornices, no fused glass pictures, or chairs in violent leather and polished metal tubing, none of the pseudomodernistic circus of the typical Hollywood night trap. The light was from heavy crystal chandeliers and the rose-damask panels of the wall were still the same rose damask, a little faded by time and darkened by dust, that had been matched long ago against the parquetry floor, of which only a small glass-smooth space in front of the little Mexican orchestra showed bare. The rest was covered by a heavy old-rose carpeting that must have cost plenty. The parquetry was made of a dozen kinds of hardwood, from Burma teak through half a dozen shades of oak and ruddy wood that looked like mahogany, and fading out to the hard pale wild lilac of the California hills, all laid in elaborate patterns, with the accuracy of a transit.
It was still a beautiful room and now there was roulette in it instead of measured, old-fashioned dancing. There were three tables close to the far wall. A low bronze railing joined them and made a fence around the croupiers. All three tables were working, but the crowd was at the middle one. I could see Vivian Regan's black head close to it, from across the room where I was leaning against the bar and turning a small glass of bacardi around on the mahogany. The bartender leaned beside me watching the cluster of well-dressed people at the middle table.
"She's pickin' 'em tonight, right on the nose," he said. "That tall blackheaded frail."
"Who is she?"
"I wouldn't know her name. She comes here a lot though."
"The hell you wouldn't know her name."
"I just work here, mister," he said without any animosity. "She's all alone too. The guy was with her passed out. They took him out to his car."
"I'll take her home," I said.
"The hell you will. Well, I wish you luck anyways. Should I gentle up that bacardi or do you like it the way it is?"
"I like it the way it is as well as I like it at all," I said.
"Me, I'd just as leave drink croup medicine," he said.
The crowd parted and two men in evening clothes pushed their way out and I saw the back of her neck and her bare shoulders in the opening. She wore a lowcut dress of dull green velvet. It looked too dressy for the occasion. The crowd closed and hid all but her black head. The two men came across the room and leaned against the bar and asked for Scotch and soda. One of them was flushed and excited. He was mopping his face with a black-bordered handkerchief. The double satin stripes down the side of his trousers were wide enough for tire tracks.
"Boy, I never saw such a run," he said in a jittery voice. "Eight wins and two stand-offs in a row on that red. That's roulette, boy, that's roulette."
"It gives me the itch," the other one said. "She's betting a grand at a crack. She can't lose."
They put their beaks in their drinks, gurgled swiftly and went back.
"So wise the little men are," the barkeep drawled. "A grand a crack, huh. I saw an old horseface in Havana once -"
The noise swelled over at the middle table and a chiseled foreign voice rose above it saying:
"If you will just be patient a moment, madam. The table cannot cover your bet. Mr. Mars will be here in a moment."
I left my bacardi and padded across the carpet. The little orchestra started to play a tango, rather loud. No one was dancing or intending to dance. I moved through a scattering of people in dinner clothes and full evening dress and sports clothes and business suits to the end table at the left. It had gone dead. Two croupiers stood behind it with their heads together and their eyes sideways. One moved a rake back and forth aimlessly over the empty layout. They were both staring at Vivian Regan.
Her long lashes twitched and her face looked unnaturally white. She was at the middle table, exactly opposite the wheel. There was a disordered pile of money and chips in front of her. It looked like a lot of money. She spoke to the croupier with a cool, insolent, ill-tempered drawl.
"What kind of a cheap outfit is this, I'd like to know. Get busy and spin that wheel, highpockets. I want one more play and I'm playing table stakes. You take it away fast enough I've noticed, but when it comes to dishing it out you start to whine."
The croupier smiled a cold polite smile that had looked at thousands of boors and millions of fools. His tall dark disinterested manner was flawless. He said gravely:
"The table cannot cover your bet, madam. You have over sixteen thousand dollars there."
"It's your money," the girl jeered. "Don't you want it back?"
A man beside her tried to tell her something. She turned swiftly and spat something at him and he faded back into the crowd red-faced. A door opened in the paneling at the far end of the enclosed place made by the bronze railing. Eddie Mars came through the door with a set indifferent smile on his face, his hands thrust into the pockets of his dinner jacket, both thumbnails glistening outside. He seemed to like that pose. He strolled behind the croupiers and stopped at the corner of the middle table. He spoke with lazy calm, less politely than the croupier.
"Something the matter, Mrs. Regan?"
She turned her face to him with a sort of lunge. I saw the curve of her cheek stiffen, as if with an almost unbearable inner tautness. She didn't answer him.
Eddie Mars said gravely: "If you're not playing any more, you must let me send someone home with you."
The girl flushed. Her cheekbones stood out white in her face. Then she laughed off-key. She said bitterly:
"One more play, Eddie. Everything I have on the red. I like red. It's the color of blood."
Eddie Mars smiled faintly, then nodded and reached into his inner breast pocket. He drew out a large pinseal wallet with gold corners and tossed it carelessly along the table to the croupier.
"Cover her bet in even thousands," he said, "if no one objects to this turn of the wheel being just for the lady."
No one objected, Vivian Regan leaned down and pushed all her winnings savagely with both hands on to the large red diamond on the layout.
The croupier leaned over the table without haste. He counted and stacked her money and chips, placed all but a few chips and bills in a neat pile and pushed the rest back off the layout with his rake. He opened Eddie Mars' wallet and drew out two flat packets of thousand-dollar bills. He broke one, counted six bills out, added them to the unbroken packet, put the four loose bills in the wallet and laid it aside as carelessly as if it had been a packet of matches. Eddie Mars didn't touch the wallet. Nobody moved except the croupier. He spun the wheel lefthanded and sent the ivory ball skittering along the upper edge with a casual flirt of his wrist. Then he drew his hands back and folded his arms.
Vivian's lips parted slowly until her teeth caught the light and glittered like knives. The ball drifted lazily down the slope of the wheel and bounced on the chromium ridges above the numbers. After a long time and then very suddenly motion left it with a dry click. The wheel slowed, carrying the ball around with it. The croupier didn't unfold his arms until the wheel had entirely ceased to revolve.
"The red wins," he said formally, without interest.
The little ivory ball lay in Red 25, the third number from the Double Zero. Vivian Regan put her head back and laughed triumphantly. The croupier lifted his rake and slowly pushed the stack of thousand-dollar bills across the layout, added them to the stake, pushed everything slowly out of the field of play.
Eddie Mars smiled, put his wallet back in his pocket, turned on his heel and left the room through the door in the paneling. A dozen people let their breath out at the same time and broke for the bar. I broke with them and got to the far end of the room before Vivian had gathered up her winnings and turned away from the table. I went into the large quiet lobby, got my hat and coat from the check girl, dropped a quarter in her tray and went out on the porch.
The doorman loomed up beside me and said:
"Can I get your car for you, sir?"
I said: "I'm just going for a walk."
The scrollwork along the edge of the porch was wet with the fog. The fog dripped from the Monterey cypresses that shadowed off into nothing towards the cliff above the ocean. You could see a scant dozen feet in any direction. I went down the porch steps and drifted off through the trees, following an indistinct path until I could hear the wash of the surf licking at the fog, low down at the bottom of the cliff. There wasn't a gleam of light anywhere. I could see a dozen trees clearly at one time, another dozen dimly, then nothing at all but the fog. I circled to the left and drifted back towards the gravel path that went around to the stables where they parked the cars. When I could make out the outlines of the house I stopped. A little in front of me I had heard a man cough.
My steps hadn't made any sound on the soft moist turf. The man coughed again, then stifled the cough with a handkerchief or a sleeve. While he was still doing that I moved forward closer to him. I made him out, a vague shadow close to the path. Something made me step behind a tree and crouch down. The man turned his head. His face should have been a white blur when he did that. It wasn't. It remained dark. There was a mask over it.
I waited, behind the tree.
Light steps, the steps of a woman, came along the invisible pathway and the man in front of me moved forward and seemed to lean against the fog. I couldn't see the woman, then I could see her indistinctly. The arrogant carriage of her head seemed familiar. The man stepped out very quickly. The two figures blended in the fog, seemed to be part of the fog. There was dead silence for a moment. Then the man said:
"This is a gun, lady. Gentle now. Sound carries in the fog. Just hand me the bag."
The girl didn't make a sound. I moved forward a step. Quite suddenly I could see the foggy fuzz on the man's hat brim. The girl stood motionless. Then her breathing began to make a rasping sound, like a small file on soft wood.
"Yell," the man said, "and I'll cut you in half."
She didn't yell. She didn't move. There was a movement from him, and a dry chuckle.
"It better be in here," he said.
A catch clicked and a fumbling sound came to me. The man turned and came towards my tree. When he had taken three or four steps he chuckled again. The chuckle was something out of my own memories. I reached a pipe out of my pocket and held it like a gun.
I called out softly: "Hi, Lanny."
The man stopped dead and started to bring his hand up. I said:
"No. I told you never to do that, Lanny. You're covered."
Nothing moved. The girl back on the path didn't move. I didn't move. Lanny didn't move.
"Put the bag down between your feet, kid," I told him. "Slow and easy."
He bent down. I jumped out and reached him still bent over. He straightened up against me breathing hard. His hands were empty.
"Tell me I can't get away with it," I said. I leaned against him and took the gun out of his overcoat pocket. "Somebody's always giving me guns," I told him. "I'm weighted down with them till I walk all crooked. Beat it."
Our breaths met and mingled, our eyes were like the eyes of two tomcats on a wall. I stepped back.
"On your way, Lanny. No hard feelings. You keep it quiet and I keep it quiet. Okey?"
"Okey," he said thickly.
The fog swallowed him. The faint sound of his steps and then nothing. I picked the bag up and felt in it and went towards the path. She still stood there motionless, a gray fur coat held tight around her throat with an ungloved hand on which a ring made a faint glitter. She wore no hat. Her dark parted hair was part of the darkness of the night. Her eyes too.
"Nice work, Marlowe. Are you my bodyguard now?" Her voice had a harsh note.
"Looks that way. Here's the bag."
She took it.
I said: "Have you a car with you?"
She laughed. "I came with a man. What are you doing here?"
"Eddie Mars wanted to see me."
"I didn't know you knew him. Why?"
"I don't mind telling you. He thought I was looking for somebody he thought had run away with his wife."
"Were you?"
"No."
"Then what did you come for?"
"To find out why he thought I was looking for somebody he thought had run away with his wife."
"Did you find out?"
"No."
"You leak information like a radio announcer," she said. "I suppose it's none of my business - even if the man was my husband. I thought you weren't interested in that."
"People keep throwing it at me."
She clicked her teeth in annoyance. The incident of the masked man with the gun seemed to have made no impression on her at all.
"Well, take me to the garage," she said. "I have to look in at my escort."
We walked along the path and around a corner of the building and there was light ahead, then around another corner and came to a bright enclosed stable yard lit with two floodlights. It was still paved with brick and still sloped down to a grating in the middle. Cars glistened and a man in a brown smock got up off a stool and came forward.
"Is my boy friend still blotto?" Vivian asked him carelessly.
"I'm afraid he is, miss. I put a rug over him and run the windows up. He's okey, I guess. Just kind of resting."
We went over to a big Cadillac and the man in the smock pulled the rear door open. On the wide back seat, loosely arranged, covered to the chin with a plaid robe, a man lay snoring with his mouth open. He seemed to be a big blond man who would hold a lot of liquor.
"Meet Mr. Larry Cobb," Vivian said. "Mister Cobb - Mister Marlowe."
"Mr. Cobb was my escort," she said. "Such a nice escort, Mr. Cobb. So attentive. You should see him sober. I should see him sober. Somebody should him sober. I mean, just for the record. So it could become a part of history, that brief flashing moment, soon buried in time, but never forgotten - when Larry Cobb was sober."
"Yeah," I said.
"I've even thought of marrying him," she went on a high strained voice, as if the shock of the stickip was just beginning to get to her. "At odd times when nothing pleasant would come into my mind. We all have those spells. Lots of money, you know. A yacht, a place on Long Island, a place at Newport, a place at Bermuda, places dotted here and there all ever the world probably - just a good Scotch bottle apart. And to Mr. Cobb a bottle of Scotch is not very far."
"Yeah," I said. "Does he have a driver to take him home?"
"Don't say 'yeah.' It's common." She looked at me with arched eyebrows. The man in the smock was chewing his lower lip hard. "Oh, undoubtedly a whole platoon of drivers. They probably do squads right in front of the garage every morning, buttons shining, harness gleaming, white gloves immaculate - a sort of West Point elegance about them."
"Well, where the hell is this driver?" I asked.
"He drove himself tonight," the man in the smock said, almost apologetically. "I could call his home and have somebody come down for him."
Vivian turned around and smiled at him as if he had just presented her with a diamond tiara.
"That would be lovely," she said. "Would you do that? I really wouldn't want Mr. Cobb to die like that - with his mouth open. Someone might think he had died of thirst."
The man in the smock said: "Not if they sniffed him, miss."
She opened her bag and grabbed a handful of paper money and pushed it at him.
"You'll take care of him, I'm sure."
"Jeeze," the man said, pop-eyed. "I sure will, miss."
"Regan is the name," she said sweetly. "Mrs. Regan. You'll probably see me again. Haven't been here long, have you?"
"No'm." His hands were doing frantic things with the fistful of money he was holding.
"You'll get to love it here," she said. She took hold of my arm. "Let's ride in your car, Marlowe."
"It's outside on the street."
"Quite all right with me, Marlowe. I love a nice walk in the fog. You meet such interesting people."
"Oh, nuts," I said.
She held on to my arm and began to shake. She held me hard all the way to the car. She had stopped shaking by the time we reached it. I drove down a curving lane of trees on the blind side of the house. The lane opened on De Cazens Boulevard, the main drag of Las Olindas. We passed under the ancient sputtering arc lights and after a while there was a town, buildings, dead-looking stores, a service station with a light over a nightbell, and at last a drugstore that was still open.
"You better have a drink," I said.
She moved her chin, a point of paleness in the corner of the seat. I turned diagonally into the curb and parked.
"A little black coffee and a smattering of rye would go well," I said.
"I could get as drunk as two sailors and love it."
I held the door for her and she got out close to me, brushing my cheek with her hair. We went into the drugstore. I bought a pint of rye at the liquor counter and carried it over to the stools and set it down on the cracked marble counter.
"Two coffees," I said. "Black, strong and made this year."
"You can't drink liquor in here," the clerk said. He had a washed-out blue smock, was thin on top as to hair, had fairly honest eyes and his chin would never hit a wall before he saw it.
Vivian Regan reached into her bag for a pack of cigarettes and shook a couple loose just like a man. She held them towards me.
"It's against the law to drink liquor in here," the clerk said.
I lit the cigarettes and didn't pay any attention to him. He drew two cups of coffee from a tarnished nickel urn and set them in front of us. He looked at the bottle of rye, muttered under his breath and said wearily:
"Okey, I'll watch the street while you pour it." He went and stood at the display window with his back to us and his ears hanging out.
"My heart's in my mouth doing this," I said, and unscrewed the top of the whiskey bottle and loaded the coffee. "The law enforcement in this town is terrific. All through prohibition Eddie Mars' place was a night club and they had two uniformed men in the lobby every night - to see that the guests didn't bring their own liquor instead of buying it from the house."
The clerk turned suddenly and walked back behind the counter and went in behind the little glass window of the prescription room. We sipped our loaded coffee. I looked at Vivian's face in the mirror back of the coffee urn. It was taut, pale, beautiful and wild. Her lips were red and harsh.
"You have wicked eyes," I said. "What's Eddie Mars got on you?"
She looked at me in the mirror.
"I took plenty away from him tonight at roulette -starting with five grand I borrowed from him yesterday and didn't have to use."
"That might make him sore. You think he sent that loogan after you?"
"What's a loogan?"
"A guy with a gun."
"Are you a loogan?"
"Sure," I laughed. "But strictly speaking a loogan is on the wrong side of the fence."
"I often wonder if there is a wrong side."
"We're losing the subject. What has Eddie Mars got on you?"
"You mean a hold on me of some sort?"
"Yes."
Her lip curled.
"Wittier, please, Marlowe. Much wittier."
"How's the General? I don't pretend to be witty."
"Not too well. He didn't get up today. You could at least stop questioning me."
"I remember a time when I thought the same about you. How much does the General know?"
"He probably knows everything."
"Norris would tell him?"
"No. Wilde, the District Attorney, was out to see him. Did you burn those pictures?"
"Sure. You worry about your little sister, don't you -from time to time."
"I think she's all I do worry about. I worry about Dad in a way, to keep things from him."
"He hasn't many illusions," I said, "but I suppose he still has pride."
"We're his blood. That's the hell of it." She stared at me in the mirror with deep, distant eyes. "I don't want him to die despising his own blood. It was always wild blood, but it wasn't always rotten blood."
"Is it now?"
"I guess you think so."
"Not yours. You're just playing the part."
She looked down. I sipped some more coffee and lit another cigarette for us.
"So you shoot people," she said quietly. "You're a killer."
"Me? How?"
"The papers and the police fixed it up nicely. But I don't believe everything I read."
"Oh, you think I accounted for Geiger - or Brody - or both of them."
She didn't say anything.
"I didn't have to," I said. "I might have, I suppose, and got away with it. Neither of them would have hesitated to throw lead at me."
"That makes you just a killer at heart, like all cops."
"Oh, nuts."
"One of those dark deadly quiet men who have no more feelings than a butcher has for slaughtered meat. I knew it the first time I saw you."
"You've got enough shady friends to know different.
"They're all soft compared to you."
"Thanks, lady. You're no English muffin yourself.
"Let's get out of this rotten little town."
I paid the check, put the bottle of rye in my pocket, and we left. The clerk still didn't like me.
We drove away from Las Olindas through a series of little dank beach towns with shack-like houses built down on the sand close to the rumble of the surf and larger houses built back on the slopes behind. A yellow window shone here and there, but most of the houses were dark. A smell of kelp came in off the water and lay on the fog. The tires sang on the moist concrete of the boulevard. The world was a wet emptiness.
We were close to Del Rey before she spoke to me for the first time since we left the drugstore. Her voice had a muffled sound, as if something was throbbing deep under it.
"Drive down by the Del Rey beach club. I want to look at the water. It's the next street on the left."
There was a winking yellow light at the intersection. I turned the car and slid down a slope with a high bluff on one side, interrurban tracks to the right, a low straggle of light far off beyond the tracks, and then very far off a glitter of pier lights and a haze in the sky over a city. That way the fog was almost gone. The road crossed the tracks where they turned to run under the bluff, then reached a paved strip of waterfront highway that bordered an open and uncluttered beach. Cars were parked along the sidewalk, facing out to sea, dark. The lights of the beach club were a few hundred yards away.
I braked the car against the curb and switched the headlights off and sat with my hands on the wheel. Under the thinning fog the surf curled and creamed, almost without sound, like a thought trying to form itself on the edge of consciousness.
"Move closer, she said almost thickly.
I moved out from under the wheel into the middle of the seat. She turned her body a little away from me as if to peer out of the window. Then she let herself fall backwards, without a sound, into my arms. Her head almost struck the wheel. Her eyes were closed, her face was dim. Then I saw that her eyes opened and flickered, the shine of them visible even in the darkness.
"Hold me close, you beast," she said.
I put my arms around her loosely at first. Her hair had a harsh feeling against my face. I tightened my arms and lifted her up. I brought her face slowly up to my face. Her eyelids were flickering rapidly, like moth wings.
I kissed her tightly and quickly. Then a long slow clinging kiss. Her lips opened under mine. Her body began to shake in my arms.
"Killer," she said softly, her breath going into my mouth.
I strained her against me until the shivering of her body was almost shaking mine. I kept on kissing her. After a long time she pulled her head away enough to say:
"Where do you live?"
"Hobart Arms. Franklin near Kenmore."
"I've never seen it."
"Want to?"
"Yes," she breathed.
"What has Eddie Mars got on you?"
Her body stiffened in my arms and her breath made a harsh sound. Her head pulled back until her eyes, wide open, ringed with white, were staring at me.
"So that's the way it is," she said in a soft dull voice.
"That's the way it is. Kissing is nice, but your father didn't hire me to sleep with you."
"You son of a bitch," she said calmly, without moving.
I laughed in her face.
"Don't think I'm an icicle," I said. "I'm not blind or without sense. I have warm blood like the next guy. You're easy to take - too damned easy. What has Eddie Mars got on you?"
"If you say that again, I'll scream."
"Go ahead and scream."
She jerked away and pulled herself upright, far back in the corner of the car.
"Men have been shot for little things like that, Marlowe."
"Men have been shot for practically nothing. The first time we met I told you I was a detective. Get it through your lovely head. I work at it, lady. I don't play at it."
She fumbled in her bag and got a handkerchief out and bit on it, her head turned away from me. The tearing sound of the handkerchief came to me. She tore it with her teeth, slowly, time after time.
"What makes you think he has anything on me?" she whispered, her voice muffled by the handkerchief.
"He lets you win a lot of money and sends a gun-poke around to take it back for him. You're not more than mildly surprised. You didn't even thank me for saving it for you. I think the whole thing was just some kind of an act. If I wanted to flatter myself, I'd say it was at least partly for my benefit."
"You think he can win or lose as he pleases."
"Sure. On even money bets, four times out of five."
"Do I have to tell you I loathe your guts, Mister Detective?"
"You don't owe me anything. I'm paid off."
She tossed the shredded handkerchief out of the car window.
"You have a lovely way with women."
"I liked kissing you."
"You kept your head beautifully. That's so flattering. Should I congratulate you, or my father?"
"I liked kissing you."
Her voice became an icy drawl.
"Take me away from here, if you will be so kind. I'm quite sure I'd like to go home."
"You won't be a sister to me?"
"If I had a razor, I'd cut your throat - just to see what ran out of it."
"Caterpillar blood," I said.
I started the car and turned it and drove back across the interurban tracks to the highway and so on into town and up to West Hollywood. She didn't speak to me. She hardly moved all the way back. I drove through the gates and up the sunken driveway to the porte-cochere of the big house. She jerked the car door open and was out of it before it had quite stopped. She didn't speak even then. I watched her back as she stood against the door after ringing the bell. The door opened and Norris looked out. She pushed past him quickly and was gone. The door banged shut and I was sitting there looking at it.
I turned back down the driveway and home.
The apartment house lobby was empty this time. No gunman waiting under the potted palm to give me orders. I took the automatic elevator up to my floor and walked along the hallway to the tune of a muted radio behind a door. I needed a drink and was in a hurry to get one. I didn't switch the light on inside the door. I made straight for the kitchenette and brought up short in three or four feet. Something was wrong. Something on the air, a scent. The shades were down at the windows and the street light leaking in at the sides made a dim light in the room. I stood still and listened. The scent on the air was a perfume, a heavy cloying perfume.
There was no sound, no sound at all. Then my eyes adjusted themselves more to the darkness and I saw there was something across the floor in front of me that shouldn't have been there. I backed, reached the wall switch with my thumb and flicked the light on.
The bed was down. Something in it giggled. A blonde head was pressed into my pillow. Two bare arms curved up and the hands belonging to them were clasped on top of the blond head. Carmen Sternwood on her back, in my bed, giggling at me. The tawny wave of her hair was spread out on the pillow as if by careful and artificial hand. Her slaty eyes peered me and had the effect, as usual, of peering from behind a barrel. She smiled. Her small sharp teeth glinted.
"Cute, aren't I?" she said.
I said harshly: "Cute as a Filipino on Saturday night."
I went over to a floor lamp and pulled the switch, went back to put off the ceiling light, and went across the room again to the chessboard on a card table under the lamp. There was a problem laid out on the board, a six-mover. I couldn't solve it, like a lot of my problems. I reached down and moved a knight, then pulled my hat and coat off and threw them somewhere. All this time the soft giggling went on from the bed, that sound that made me think of rats behind a wainscoting in an old house.
"I bet you can't even guess how I got in."
I dug a cigarette out and looked at her with bleak eyes. "I bet I can. You came through the keyhole, just like Peter Pan."
"Who's he?"
"Oh, a fellow I used to know around the poolroom."
She giggled.
"You're cute, aren't you?" she said.
I began to say: "About that thumb -" but she was ahead of me. I didn't have to remind her. She took her right hand from behind her head and started sucking the thumb and eyeing me with very round and naughty eyes.
"I'm all undressed," she said, after I had smoked and stared at her for a minute.
"By God," I said, "it was right at the back of my mind. I was groping for it. I almost had it, when you spoke. In another minute I'd have said 'I bet you're all undressed.' I always wear my rubbers in bed myself in case I wake up with a bad conscience and have to sneak away from it."
"You're cute." She rolled her head a little, kittenishly. Then she took her left hand from under her head and took hold of the covers, paused dramatically, and swept them aside. She was undressed all right. She lay there on the bed in the lamplight, as naked and glistening as a pearl. The Sternwood girls were giving me both barrels that night.
I pulled a shred of tobacco off the edge of my lower lip.
"That's nice," I said. "But I've already seen it all. Remember? I'm the guy that keeps finding you without any clothes on."
She giggled some more and covered herself up again.
"Well, how did you get in?" I asked her.
"The manager let me in. I showed him your card. I'd stolen it from Vivian. I told him you told me to come here and wait for you. I was - I was mysterious." She glowed with delight.
"Neat," I said. "Managers are like that. Now I know how you got in, tell me how you're going to go out."
She giggled.
"Not going - not for a long time... I like it here. You're cute."
"Listen," I pointed my cigarette at her. "Don't make me dress you again. I'm tired. I appreciate all you're offering me. It's just more than I could possibly take. Doghouse Reilly never let a pal down that way. I'm your friend. I won't let you down - in spite of yourself. You and I have to keep on being friends, and this isn't the way to do it. Now will you dress like a nice little girl?"
She shook her head from side to side.
"Listen," I plowed on, "you don't really care anything about me. You're just showing how naughty you can be. But you don't have to show me. I knew it already. I'm the guy that found -"
"Put the light out," she giggled.
I threw my cigarette on the floor and stamped on it. I took a handkerchief out and wiped the palms of my hands. I tried it once more.
"It isn't on account of the neighbors," I told her. "They don't really care a lot. There's a lot of stray broads in any apartment house and one more won't make the building rock. It's a question of professional pride. You know - professional pride. I'm working for your father. He's a sick man, very frail, very helpless. He sort of trusts me not to pull any stunts. Won't you please get dressed, Carmen?"
"Your name isn't Doghouse Reilly," she said. "It's Philip Marlowe. You can't fool me."
I looked down at the chessboard. The move with the knight was wrong. I put it back where I had moved it from. Knights had no meaning in this game. It wasn't a game for knights. I looked at her again. She lay still now, her face pale against the pillow, her eyes large and dark and empty as rain barrels in a drought. One of her small five-fingered thumbless hands picked at the cover restlessly. There was a vague glimmer of doubt starting to get born in her somewhere. She didn't know about it yet. It's so hard for women - even nice women - to realize that their bodies are not irresistible.
I said: "I'm going out in the kitchen and mix a drink. Want one?"
"Uh-huh." Dark silent mystified eyes stared at me solemnly, the doubt growing larger in them, creeping into them noiselessly, like a cat in long grass stalking a young blackbird.
"If you're dressed when I get back, you'll get the drink. Okey?"
Her teeth parted and a faint hissing noise came out of her mouth. She didn't answer me. I went out to the kitchenette and got out some Scotch and fizzwater and mixed a couple of highballs. I didn't have anything really exciting to drink, like nitroglycerin or distilled tiger's breath. She hadn't moved when I got back with the glasses. The hissing had stopped. Her eyes were dead again. Her lips started to smile at me. Then she sat up suddenly and threw all the covers off her body and reached.
"Gimme."
"When you're dressed. Not until you're dressed."
I put the two glasses down on the card table and sat down myself and lit another cigarette.
"Go ahead. I won't watch you."
I looked away. Then I was aware of the hissing noise very sudden and sharp. It startled me into looking at her again. She sat there naked, propped on her hands, her mouth open a little, her face like scraped bone. The hissing noise came tearing out of her mouth as if she had nothing to do with it. There was something behind her eyes, blank as they were, that I had never seen in a woman's eyes.
Then her lips moved very slowly and carefully, as if they were artificial lips and had to be manipulated with springs.
She called me a filthy name.
I didn't mind that. I didn't mind what she called me, what anybody called me. But this was the room I had to live in. It was all I had in the way of a home. In it was everything that was mine, that had any association for me, any past, anything that took the place of a family. Not much; a few books, pictures, radio, chessmen, old letters, stuff like that. Nothing. Such as they were they had all my memories.
I couldn't stand her in that room any longer. What she called me only reminded me of that.
I said carefully: "I'll give you three minutes to get dressed and out of here. If you're not out by then, I'll throw you out - by force. Just the way you are, naked. And I'll throw your clothes after you into the hall. Now - get started."
Her teeth chattered and the hissing noise was sharp and animal. She swung her feet to the floor and reached for her clothes on a chair beside the bed. She dressed. I watched her. She dressed with stiff awkward fingers - for a woman - but quickly at that. She was dressed in a little over two minutes. I timed it.
She stood there beside the bed, holding a green bag tight against a fur-trimmed coat. She wore a rakish green hat crooked on her head. She stood there for a moment and hissed at me, her face still like scraped bone, her eyes still empty and yet full of some jungle emotion. Then she walked quickly to the door and opened it and went out, without speaking, without looking back. I heard the elevator lurch into motion and move in the shaft.
I walked to the windows and pulled the shades up and opened the windows wide. The night air came drifting in with a kind of stale sweetness that still remembered automobile exhausts and the streets of the city. I reached for my drink and drank it slowly. The apartment house door closed itself down below me. Steps tinkled on the quiet sidewalk. A car started up not far away. It rushed off into the night with a rough clashing of gears. I went back to the bed and looked down at it. The imprint of her head was still in the pifiow, of her small corrupt body still on the sheets.
I put my empty glass down and tore the bed to pieces savagely.
It was raining again the next morning, a slanting gray rain like a swung curtain of crystal beads. I got up feeling sluggish and tired and stood looking out of the windows, with a dark, harsh taste of Sternwoods still in my mouth. I was as empty of life as a scarecrow's pockets. I went out to the kitchenette and drank two cups of black coffee. You can have a hangover from other things than alcohol. I had one from women. Women made me sick.
I shaved and showered and dressed and got my raincoat out and went downstairs and looked out of the front door. Across the street, a hundred feet up, a gray Plymouth sedan was parked. It was the same one that had tried to trail me around the day before, the same one that I had asked Eddie Mars about. There might be a cop in it, if a cop had that much time on his hands and wanted to waste it following me around. Or it might be a smoothie in the detective business trying to get a noseful of somebody else's case in order to chisel a way into it. Or it might be the Bishop of Bermuda disapproving of my night life.
I went out back and got my convertible from the garage and drove it around front past the gray Plymouth. There was a small man in it, alone. He started up after me. He worked better in the rain. He stayed close enough so that I couldn't make a short block and leave that before he entered it, and he stayed back far enough so that other cars were between us most of the time. I drove down to the boulevard and parked in the lot next to my building and came out of there with my raincoat collar up and my hat brim low and the raindrops tapping icily at my face in between. The Plymouth was across the way at a fireplug. I walked down to the intersection and crossed with the green light and walked back, close to the edge of the sidewalk and the parked cars. The Plymouth hadn't moved. Nobody got out of it. I reached it and jerked open the door on the curb side.
A small bright-eyed man was pressed back into the corner behind the wheel. I stood and looked in at him, the rain thumping my back. His eyes blinked behind the swirling smoke of a cigarette. His hands tapped restlessly on the thin wheel.
I said: "Can't you make your mind up?"
He swallowed and the cigarette bobbed between his lips.
"I don't think I know you," he said, in a tight little voice.
"Marlowe's the name. The guy you've been trying to follow around for a couple of days."
"I ain't following anybody, doc."
"This jalopy is. Maybe you can't control it. Have it your own way. I'm now going to eat breakfast in the coffee shop across the street, orange juice, bacon and eggs, toast, honey, three or four cups of coffee and a toothpick. I am then going up to my office, which is on the seventh floor of the building right opposite you. If you have anything that's worrying you beyond endurance, drop up and chew it over. I'll only be oiling my machine gun."
I left him blinking and walked away. Twenty minutes later I was airing the scrubwoman's Soiree d'Amour out of my office and opening up a thick, rough envelope addressed in a fine, old-fashioned, pointed handwriting. The envelope contained a brief formal note and a large mauve check for five hundred dollars, payable to Philip Marlowe and signed, Guy be Brisay Sternwood, by Vincent Norris. That made it a nice morning. I was making out a bank slip when the buzzer told me somebody had entered my two by four reception room. It was the little man from the Plymouth.
"Fine," I said. "Come in and shed your coat."
He slid past me carefully as I held the door, as carefully as though he feared I might plant a kick in his minute buttocks. We sat down and faced each other across the desk. He was a very small man, not more than five feet three and would hardly weigh as much as a butcher's thumb. He had tight brilliant eyes that wanted to look hard, and looked as hard as oysters on the half shell. He wore a double-breasted dark gray suit that was too wide in the shoulders and had too much lapel. Over this, open, an Irish tweed coat with some badly worn spots. A lot of foulard tie bulged out and was rainspotted above his crossed lapels.
"Maybe you know me," he said. "I'm Harry Jones."
I said I didn't know him. I pushed a flat tin of cigarettes at him. His small neat fingers speared one like a trout taking the fly. He lit it with the desk lighter and waved his hand.
"I been around," he said. "Know the boys and such. Used to do a little liquor-running down from Hueneme Point. A touch racket, brother. Riding the scout car with a gun in your lap and a wad on your hip that would choke a coal chute. Plenty of times we paid off four sets of law before we hit Beverly Hills. A tough racket."
"Terrible," I said.
He leaned back and blew smoke at the ceiling from the small tight corner of his small tight mouth.
"Maybe you don't believe me," he said.
"Maybe I don't," I said. "And maybe I do. And then again maybe I haven't bothered to make my mind up. Just what is the build-up supposed to do to me?"
"Nothing," he said tartly.
"You've been following me around for a couple, of days," I said. "Like a fellow trying to pick up a girl and lacking the last inch of nerve. Maybe you're selling insurance. Maybe you knew a fellow called Joe Brody. That's a lot of maybes, but I have a lot on hand in my business."
His eyes bulged and his lower lip almost fell in his lap.
"Christ, how'd you know that?" he snapped.
"I'm psychic. Shake your business up and pour it. I haven't got all day."
The brightness of his eyes almost disappeared between the suddenly narrowed lids. There was silence. The rain pounded down on the flat tarred roof over the Mansion House lobby below my windows. His eyes opened a little, shined again, and his voice was full of thought.
"I was trying to get a line on you, sure," he said. "I've got something to sell - cheap, for a couple of C notes. How'd you tie me to Joe?"
I opened a letter and read it. It offered me a six months' correspondence course in fingerprinting at a special professional discount. I chopped it into the waste basket and looked at the little man again.
"Don't mind me. I was just guessing. You're not a cop. You don't belong to Eddie Mars' outfit. I asked him last night. I couldn't think of anybody else but Joe Brody's friends who would be that much interested in me."
"Jesus," he said and licked his lower lip. His face had turned white as paper when I mentioned Eddie Mars. His mouth drooped open and his cigarette hung to the corner of it by some magic, as if it had grown there. "Aw, you're kidding me," he said at last, with the sort of smile the operating room sees.
"All right. I'm kidding you." I opened another letter. This one wanted to send me a daily newsletter from Washington, all inside stuff, straight from the cookhouse. "I suppose Agnes is loose," I added.
"Yeah. She sent me. You interested?"
"Well - she's a blonde."
"Nuts. You made a crack when you were up there that night - the night Joe got squibbed off. Something about Brody must have known something good about the Sternwoods or he wouldn't have taken the chance on that picture he sent them."
"Uh-huh. So he had? What was it?"
"That's what the two hundred bucks pays for."
I dropped some more fan mail into the basket and lit myself a fresh cigarette.
"We gotta get out of town," he said. "Agnes is a nice girl. You can't hold that stuff on her. It's not so easy for a dame to get by these days."
"She's too big for you," I said. "She'll roll on you and smother you."
"That's kind of a dirty crack, brother," he said with something that was near enough to dignity to make me stare at him.
I said: "You're right. I've been meeting the wrong kind of people lately. Let's cut out the gabble and get down to cases. What have you got for the money?"
"Would you pay for it?"
"If it does what?"
"If it helps you find Rusty Regan."
"I'm not looking for Rusty Regan."
"Says you. Want to hear it or not?"
"Go ahead and chirp. I'll pay for anything I use. Two C notes buys a lot of information in my circle."
"Eddie Mars had Regan bumped off," he said calmly, and leaned back as if he had just been made a vice-president.
I waved a hand in the direction of the door.
"I wouldn't even argue with you," I said. "I wouldn't waste the oxygen. On your way, small size."
He leaned across the desk, white lines at the corners of his mouth. He snubbed his cigarette out carefully, over and over again, without looking at it. From behind a communicating door came the sound of a typewriter clacking monotonously to the bell, to the shift, line after line.
"I'm not kidding," he said.
"Beat it. Don't bother me. I have work to do."
"No you don't," he said sharply. "I ain't that easy. I came here to speak my piece and I'm speaking it. I knew Rusty myself. Not well, well enough to say 'How's a boy?' and he'd answer me or he wouldn't, according to how he felt. A nice guy though. I always liked him. He was sweet on a singer named Mona Grant. Then she changed her name to Mars. Rusty got sore and married a rich dame that hung around the joints like she couldn't sleep well at home. You know all about her, tall, dark, enough looks for a Derby winner, but the type would put a lot of pressure on a guy. High-strung. Rusty wouldn't get along with her. But Jesus, he'd get along with her old man's dough, wouldn't he? That's what you think. This Regan was a cockeyed sort of buzzard. He had long-range eyes. He was looking over into the next valley all the time. He wasn't scarcely around where he was. I don't think he gave a damn about dough. And coming from me, brother, that's a compliment."
The little man wasn't so dumb after all. A three for a quarter grifter wouldn't even think such thoughts, much less know how to express them.
I said: "So he ran away."
"He started to run away, maybe. With this girl Mona. She wasn't living with Eddie Mars, didn't like his rackets. Especially the side lines, like blackmail, bent cars, hideouts for hot boys from the east, and so on. The talk was Regan told Eddie one night, right out in the open, that if he ever messed Mona up in any criminal rap, he'd be around to see him."
"Most of this is on the record, Harry," I said. "You can't expect money for that."
"I'm coming to what isn't. So Regan blew. I used to see him every afternoon in Vardi's drinking Irish whiskey and staring at the wall. He don't talk much any more. He'd give me a bet now and then, which was what I was there for, to pick up bets for Puss Walgreen."
"I thought he was in the insurance business."
"That's what it says on the door. I guess he'd sell you insurance at that, if you tramped on him. Well, about the middle of September I don't see Regan any more. I don't notice it right away. You know how it is. A guy's there and you see him and then he ain't there and you don't not see him until something makes you think of it. What makes me think about it is I hear a guy say laughing that Eddie Mars' woman lammed out with Rusty Regan and Mars is acting like he was best man, instead of being sore. So I tell Joe Brody and Joe was smart."
"Like hell he was," I said.
"Not copper smart, but still smart. He's out for the dough. He gets to figuring could he get a line somehow on the two lovebirds he could maybe collect twice - once from Eddie Mars and once from Regan's wife. Joe knew the family a little."
"Five grand worth," I said. "He nicked them for that a while back."
"Yeah?" Harry Jones looked mildly surprised. "Agnes ought to of told me that. There's a frail for you. Always holding out. Well, Joe and me watch the papers and we don't see anything, so we know old Sternwood has a blanket on it. Then one day I see Lash Canino in Vardi's. Know him?"
I shook my head.
"There's a boy that is tough like some guys think they are tough. He does a job for Eddie Mars when Mars needs him - trouble-shooting. He'd bump a guy off between drinks. When Mars don't need him he don't go near him. And he don't stay in L.A. Well it might be something and it might not. Maybe they got a line on Regan and Mars has just been sitting back with a smile on his puss, waiting for the chance. Then again it might be something else entirely. Anyway I tell Joe and Joe gets on Canino's tail. He can tail me, I'm no good at it. I'm giving that one away. No charge. And Joe tails Canino out to the Sternwood place and Canino parks outside the estate and a car come up beside him with a girl in it. They talk for a while and Joe thinks the girl passes something over, like maybe dough. The girl beats it. It's Regan's wife. Okey, she knows Canino and Canino knows Mars. So Joe figures Canino knows something about Regan and is trying to squeeze a little on the side for himself. Canino blows and Joe loses him. End of Act One."
"What does this Canino look like?"
"Short, heavy set, brown hair, brown eyes, and always wears brown clothes and a brown hat. Even wears a brown suede raincoat. Drives a brown coupe. Everything brown for Mr. Canino."
"Let's have Act Two," I said.
"Without some dough that's all."
"I don't see two hundred bucks in it. Mrs. Regan married an ex-bootlegger out of the joints. She'd know other people of his sort. She knows Eddie Mars well. If she thought anything had happened to Regan, Eddie would be the very man she'd go to, and Canino might be the man Eddie would pick to handle the assignment. Is that all you have?"
"Would you give the two hundred to know where Eddie's wife is?" the little man asked calmly.
He had all my attention now. I almost cracked the arms of my chair leaning on them.
"Even if she was alone?" Harry Jones added in a soft, rather sinister tone. "Even if she never run away with Regan at all, and was being kept now about forty miles from LA. in a hideout - so the law would keep on thinking she had dusted with him? Would you pay two hundred bucks for that, shamus?"
I licked my lips. They tasted dry and salty.
"I think I would," I said. "Where?"
"Agnes found her," he said grimly. "Just by a lucky break. Saw her out riding and managed to tail her home. Agnes will tell you where that is - when she's holding the money in her hand."
I made a hard face at him.
"You could tell the coppers for nothing, Harry. They have some good wreckers down at Central these days. If they killed you trying they still have Agnes."
"Let 'em try," he said. "I ain't so brittle."
"Agnes must have something I didn't notice."
"She's a grifter, shamus. I'm a grifter. We're all grifters. So we sell each other out for a nickel. Okey. See can you make me." He reached for another of my cigarettes, placed it neatly between his lips and lit it with a match the way I do myself, missing twice on his thumbnail and then using his foot. He puffed evenly and stared at me level-eyed, a funny little hard guy I could have thrown from home plate to second base. A small man in a big man's world. There was some thing I liked about him.
"I haven't pulled anything in here," he said steadily. "I come in talking two C's. That's still the price. I come because I thought I'd get a take it or leave it, one right gee to another. Now you're waving cops at me. You oughta be ashamed of yourself."
I said: "You'll get the two hundred - for that information. I have to get the money myself first."
He stood up and nodded and pulled his worn little Irish tweed coat tight around his chest.
"That's okey. After dark is better anyway. It's a leery job - buckin' guys like Eddie Mars. But a guy has to eat. The book's been pretty dull lately. I think the big boys have told Puss Walgreen to move on. Suppose you come over there to the office, Fulwider Building, Western and Santa Monica, four-twenty-eight at the back. You bring the money, I'll take you to Agnes."
"Can't you tell me yourself? I've seen Agnes."
"I promised her," he said simply. He buttoned his overcoat, cocked his hat jauntily, nodded again and strolled to the door. He went out. His steps died along the hall.
I went down to the bank and deposited my five-hundred-dollar check and drew out two hundred in currency. I went upstairs again and sat in my chair thinking about Harry Jones and his story. It seemed a little too pat. It bad the austere simplicity of fiction rather than the tangled woof of fact. Captain Gregory ought to have been able to find Mona Mars, if she was that close to his beat. Supposing, that is, he had tried.
I thought about it most of the day. Nobody came into the office. Nobody called me on the phone. It kept on raining.
At seven the rain had stopped for a breathing spell, but the gutters were still flooded. On Santa Monica the water was level with the sidewalk and a thin film of it washed over the top of the curbing. A traffic cop in shining black rubber from boots to cap sloshed through the flood on his way from the shelter of a sodden awning. My rubber heels slithered on the sidewalk as I turned into the narrow lobby of the Fulwider Building. A single drop light burned far back, beyond an open, once gilt elevator. There was a tarnished and well-missed spittoon on a gnawed rubber mat. A case of false teeth hung on the mustard-colored wall like a fuse box in a screen porch. I shook the rain off my hat and looked at the building directory beside the case of teeth. Numbers with names and numbers without names. Plenty of vacancies or plenty of tenants who wished to remain anonymous. Painless dentists, shyster detective agencies, small sick businesses that had crawled there to die, mail order schools that would teach you how to become a railroad clerk or a radio technician or a screen writer - if the postal inspectors didn't catch up with them first. A nasty building. A building in which the smell of stale cigar butts would be the cleanest odor.
An old man dozed in the elevator, on a ramshackle stool, with a burstout cushion under him. His mouth was open, his veined temples glistened in the weak light. He wore a blue uniform coat that fitted him the way a stall fits a horse. Under that gray trousers with frayed cuffs, white cotton socks and black kid shoes, one of which was slit across a bunion. On the stool he slept miserably, waiting for a customer. I went past him softly, the clandestine air of the building prompting me, found the fire door and pulled it open. The fire stairs hadn't been swept in a month. Bums had slept on them, eaten on them, left crusts and fragments of greasy newspaper, matches, a gutted imitation-leather pocketbook. In a shadowy angle against the scribbled wall a pouched ring of pale rubber had fallen and had not been disturbed. A very nice building.
I came out at the fourth floor sniffing for air. The hallway had the same dirty spittoon and frayed mat, the same mustard walls, the same memories of low tide. I went down the line and turned a corner. The name: "L. D. Walgreen - Insurance," showed on a dark pebbled glass door, on a second dark door, on a third behind which there was a light. One of the dark doors said: "Entrance."
A glass transom was open above the lighted door. Through it the sharp birdlike voice of Harry Jones spoke, saying:
"Canino?... Yeah, I've seen you around somewhere. Sure."
I froze. The other voice spoke. It had a heavy purr, like a small dynamo behind a brick wall. It said:
"I thought you would." There was a vaguely sinister note in that voice.
A chair scraped on linoleum, steps sounded, the transom above me squeaked shut. A shadow melted from behind the pebbled glass.
I went back to the first of the three doors marked with the name Walgreen. I tried it cautiously. It was locked. It moved in a loose frame, an old door fitted many years past, made of half-seasoned wood and shrunken now. I reached my wallet out and slipped the thick hard window of celluloid from over my driver's license. A burglar's tool the law had forgotten to proscribe. I put my gloves on, leaned softly and lovingly against the door and pushed the knob hard away from the frame. I pushed the celluloid plate into the wide crack and felt for the slope of the spring lock. There was a dry click, like a small icicle breaking. I hung there motionless, like a lazy fish in the water. Nothing happened inside. I turned the knob and pushed the door back into darkness. I shut it behind me as carefully as I had opened it.
The lighted oblong of an uncurtained window faced me, cut by the angle of a desk. On the desk a hooded typewriter took form, then the metal knob of a communicating door. This was unlocked. I passed into the second of the three offices. Rain rattled suddenly against the closed window. Under its noise I crossed the room. A tight fan of light spread from an inch opening of the door into the lighted office. Everything very convenient. I walked like a cat on a mantel and reached the hinged side of the door, put an eye to the crack and saw nothing but light against the angle of the wood.
The purring voice was now saying quite pleasantly:
"Sure, a guy could sit on his fanny and crab what another guy done if he knows what it's all about. So you go to see this peeper. Well, that was your mistake. Eddie don't like it. The peeper told Eddie some guy in a gray Plymouth was tailing him. Eddie naturally wants to know who and why, see."
Harry Jones laughed lightly.
"What makes it his business?"
"That don't get you no place."
"You know why I went to the peeper. I already told you. Account of Joe Brody's girl. She has to blow and she's shatting on her uppers. She figures the peeper can get her some dough. I don't have any."
The purring voice said gently:
"Dough for what? Peepers don't give that stuff out to punks."
"He could raise it. He knows rich people." Harry Jones laughed, a brave little laugh.
"Don't fuss with me, little man." The purring voice had an edge, like sand in the bearing.
"Okey, okey. You know the dope on Brody's bump-off. That screwy kid done it all right, but the night it happened this Marlowe was right there in the room."
"That's known, little man. He told it to the law."
"Yeah - here's what isn't. Brody was trying to peddie a nudist photo of the young Sternwood girl. Marlowe got wise to him. While they were arguing about it the young Sternwood girl dropped around herself - with a gat. She took a shot at Brody. She lets one fly and breaks a window. Only the peeper didn't tell the coppers about that. And Agnes didn't neither. She figures it's railroad fare for her not to."
"This ain't got anything to do with Eddie?"
"Show me how."
"Where's this Agnes at?"
"Nothing doing."
"You tell me, little man. Here, or in the back room where the boys pitch dimes against the wall."
"She's my girl now, Canino. I don't put my girl in the middle for anybody."
A silence followed. I listened to the rain lashing the windows. The smell of cigarette smoke came through the crack of the door. I wanted to cough. I bit hard on a handkerchief.
The purring voice said, still gentle:
"From what I hear this blonde broad was just a shill for Geiger. I'll talk it over with Eddie. How much you tap the peeper for?"
"Two centuries."
"Get it?"
Harry Jones laughed again.
"I'm seeing him tomorrow. I have hopes."
"Where's Agnes?"
"Listen -"
"Where's Agnes?"
Silence.
"Look at it, little man."
I didn't move. I wasn't wearing a gun. I didn't have to see through the crack of the door to know that a gun was what the purring voice was inviting Harry Jones to look at. But I didn't think Mr. Canino would do anything with his gun beyond showing it. I waited.
"I'm looking at it," Harry Jones said, his voice squeezed tight as if it could hardly get past his teeth. "And I don't see anything I didn't see before. Go ahead and blast and see what it gets you."
"A Chicago overcoat is what it would get you, little man."
Silence.
"Where's Agnes?"
Harry Jones sighed.
"Okey," he said wearily. "She's in an apartment house at 28 Court Street, up on Bunker Hill. Apartment 301. I guess I'm yellow all right. Why should I front for that twist?"
"No reason. You got good sense. You and me'll go out and talk to her. All I want is to find out is she dummying up on you, kid. If it's the way you say it is, everything is jakeloo. You can put the bite on the peeper and be on your way. No hard feelings?"
"No," Harry Jones said. "No hard feelings, Canino."
"Fine. Let's dip the bill. Got a glass?" The purring voice was now as false as an usherette's eyelashes and as slippery as a watermelon seed. A drawer was pulled open. Something jarred on wood. A chair squeaked. A scuffing sound on the floor. "This is bond stuff," the purring voice said.
There was a gurgling sound. "Moths in your ermine, as the ladies say."
Harry Jones said softly: "Success."
I heard a sharp cough. Then a violent retching. There was a small thud on the floor, as if a thick glass had fallen. My fingers curled against my raincoat.
The purring voice said gently: "You ain't sick from just one drink, are you, pal?"
Harry Jones didn't answer. There was labored breathing for a short moment. Then thick silence folded down. Then a chair scraped.
"So long, little man," said Mr. Canino.
Steps, a click, the wedge of light died at my feet, a door opened and closed quietly. The steps faded, leisurely and assured.
I stirred around the edge of the door and pulled it wide and looked into blackness relieved by the dim shine of a window. The corner of a desk glittered faintly. A hunched shape took form in a chair behind it. In the close air there was a heavy clogged smell, almost a perfume. I went across to the corridor door and listened. I heard the distant clang of the elevator.
I found the light switch and light glowed in a dusty glass bowl hanging from the ceiling by three brass chains. Harry Jones looked at me across the desk, his eyes wide open, his face frozen in a tight spasm, the skin bluish. His small dark head was tilted to one side. He sat upright against the back of the chair.
A street-car bell clanged at an almost infinite distance and the sound came buffeted by innumerable walls. A brown half pint of whiskey stood on the desk with the cap off. Harry Jones' glass glinted against a castor of the desk. The second glass was gone.
I breathed shallowly, from the top of my lungs, and bent above the bottle. Behind the charred smell of the bourbon another odor lurked, faintly, the odor of bitter almonds. Harry Jones dying had vomited on his coat. That made it cyanide.
I walked around him carefully and lifted a phone book from a hook on the wooden frame of the window. I let it fall again, reached the telephone as far as it would go from the little dead man. I dialed information. The voice answered.
"Can you give me the phone number of Apartment 301, 28 Court Street?"
"One moment, please." The voice came to me borne on the smell of bitter almonds. A silence. "The number is Wentworth 2528. It is listed under Glendower Apartments."
I thanked the voice and dialed the number. The bell rang three times, then the line opened. A radio blared along the wire and was muted. A burly male voice said:
"Hello."
"Is Agnes there?"
"No Agnes here, buddy. What number you want?"
"Wentworth two-five-two-eight."
"Right number, wrong gal. Ain't that a shame?" The voice cackled.
I hung up and reached for the phone book again and looked up the Wentworth Apartments. I dialed the manager's number. I had a blurred vision of Mr. Canino driving fast through rain to another appointment with death.
"Glendower Apartments. Mr. Schiff speaking."
"This is Wallis, Police Identification Bureau. Is there a girl named Agnes Lozelle registered in your place?"
"Who did you say you were?"
I told him again.
"If you give me your number, I'll -"
"Cut the comedy," I said sharply, "I'm in a hurry. Is there or isn't there?"
"No. There isn't." The voice was as stiff as a breadstick.
"Is there a tall blonde with green eyes registered in the flop?"
"Say, this isn't any flop -"
"Oh, can it, can it!" I rapped at him in a police voice. "You want me to send the vice squad over there and shake the joint down? I know all about Bunker Hill apartment houses, mister. Especially the ones that have phone numbers listed for each apartment."
"Hey, take it easy, officer. I'll co-operate. There's a couple of blondes here, sure. Where isn't there? I hadn't noticed their eyes much. Would yours be alone?"
"Alone, or with a little chap about five feet three, a hundred and ten, sharp black eyes, wears a doublebreasted dark gray suit and Irish tweed overcoat, gray hat. My information is Apartment 301, but all I get there is the big razzoo."
"Oh, she ain't there. There's a couple of car salesmen living in three-o-one."
"Thanks, I'll drop around."
"Make it quiet, won't you? Come to my place, direct?"
"Much obliged, Mr. Schiff." I hung up.
I wiped sweat off my face. I walked to the far corner of the office and stood with my face to the wall, patted it with a hand. I turned around slowly and looked across at little Harry Jones grimacing in his chair.
"Well, you fooled him, Harry," I said out loud, in a voice that sounded queer to me. "You lied to him and you drank your cyanide like a little gentleman. You died like a poisoned rat, Harry, but you're no rat to me."
I had to search him. It was a nasty job. His pockets yielded nothing about Agnes, nothing that I wanted at all. I didn't think they would, but I had to be sure. Mr. Canino might be back. Mr. Canino would be the kind of self-confident gentleman who would not mind returning to the scene of his crime.
I put the light out and started to open the door. The phone bell rang jarringly down on the baseboard. I listened to it, my jaw muscles drawn into a knot, aching. Then I shut the door and put the light on again and went across to it.
"Yeah?"
A woman's voice. Her voice.
"Is Harry around?"
"Not for a minute, Agnes."
She waited a while on that. Then she said slowly:
"Who's talking?"
"Marlowe, the guy that's trouble to you."
"Where is he?" sharply.
"I came over to give him two hundred bucks in return for certain information. The offer holds. I have the money. Where are you?"
"Didn't he tell you?"
"No."
"Perhaps you'd better ask him. Where is he?"
"I can't ask him. Do you know a man named Canino?"
Her gasp came as clearly as though she had been beside me.
"Do you want the two C's or not?" I asked.
"I- I want it pretty bad, mister."
"All right then. Tell me where to bring it."
"I- I" Her voice trailed off and came back with a panic rush. "Where's Harry?"
"Got scared and blew. Meet me somewhere - anywhere at all - I have the money."
"I don't believe you - about Harry. It's a trap."
"Oh stuff. I could have had Harry hauled in long ago. There isn't anything to make a trap for. Canino got a line on Harry somehow and he blew. I want quiet, you want quiet, Harry wants quiet."
Harry already had it. Nobody could take it away from him.
"You don't think I'd stooge for Eddie Mars, do you, angel?"
"No-o, I guess not. Not that. I'll meet you in half an hour. Beside Bullocks Wilshire, the east entrance to the parking lot."
"Right," I said.
I dropped the phone in its cradle. The wave of almond odor flooded me again, and the sour smell of vomit. The little dead man sat silent in his chair, beyond fear, beyond change.
I left the office. Nothing moved in the dingy corridor. No pebbled glass door had light behind it. I went down the fire stairs to the second floor and from there looked down at the lighted roof of the elevator cage. I pressed the button. Slowly the car lurched into motion. I ran down the stairs again. The car was above me when I walked out of the building.
It was raining hard again. I walked into it with the heavy drops slapping my face. When one of them touched my tongue I knew that my mouth was open and the ache at the side of my jaws told me it was open wide and strained back, mimicking the rictus of death carved upon the face of Harry Jones.
"Give me the money."
The motor of the gray Plymouth throbbed under her voice and the rain pounded above it. The violet light at the top of Bullock's green-tinged tower was far above us, serene and withdrawn from the dark, dripping city. Her black-gloved hand reached out and I put the bills in it. She bent over to count them under the dim light of the dash. A bag clicked open, clicked shut. She let a spent breath die on her lips. She leaned towards me.
"I'm leaving, copper. I'm on my way. This is a getaway stake and God how I need it. What happened to Harry?"
"I told you he ran away. Canino got wise to him somehow. Forget Harry. I've paid and I want my information."
"You'll get it. Joe and I were out riding Foothill Boulevard Sunday before last. It was late and the lights coming up and the usual mess of cars. We passed a brown coupe and I saw the girl who was driving it. There was a man beside her, a dark short man. The girl was a blonde. I'd seen her before. She was Eddie Mars' wife. The guy was Canino. You wouldn't forget either of them, if you ever saw them. Joe tailed the coupe from in front. He was good at that. Canino, the watchdog, was taking her out for air. A mile or so east of Realito a road turns towards the foothills. That's orange country to the south but to the north it's as bare as hell's back yard and smack up against the hills there's a cyanide plant where they make the stuff for fumigation. Just off the highway there's a small garage and paintshop run by a gee named Art Huck. Hot car drop, likely. There's a frame house beyond this, and beyond the house nothing but the foothills and the bare stone outcrop and the cyanide plant a couple of miles on. That's the place where she's holed up. They turned off on this road and Joe swung around and went back and we saw the car turn off the road where the frame house was. We sat there half an hour looking through the cars going by. Nobody came back out. When it was quite dark Joe sneaked up there and took a look. He said there were lights in the house and a radio was going and just the one car out in front, the coupe. So we beat it."
She stopped talking and I listened to the swish of tires on Wilshire.
I said: "They might have shifted quarters since then but that's what you have to sell - that's what you have to sell. Sure you knew her?"
"If you ever see her, you won't make a mistake the second time. Good-by, copper, and wish me luck. I got a raw deal."
"Like hell you did," I said, and walked away across the street to my own car.
The gray Plymouth moved forward, gathered speed, and darted around the corner on to Sunset Place. The sound of its motor died, and with it blonde Agnes wiped herself off the slate for good, so far as I was concerned. Three men dead, Geiger, Brody and Harry Jones, and the woman went riding off in the rain with my two hundred in her bag and not a mark on her. I kicked my starter and drove on downtown to eat. I ate a good dinner. Forty miles in the rain is a hike, and I hoped to make it a round trip.
I drove north across the river, on into Pasadena, through Pasadena and almost at once I was in orange groves. The tumbling rain was solid white spray in the headlights. The windshield wiper could hardly keep the glass clear enough to see through. But not even the drenched darkness could hide the flawless lines of the orange trees wheeling away like endless spokes into the night.
Cars passed with a tearing hiss and a wave of dirty spray. The highway jerked through a little town that was all packing houses and sheds, and railway sidings nuzzling them. The groves thinned out and dropped away to the south and the road climbed and it was cold and to the north the black foothills crouched closer and sent a bitter wind whipping down their flanks. Then faintly out of the dark two yellow vapor lights glowed high up in the air and a neon sign between them said: "Welcome to Realito." Frame houses were spaced far back from a wide main street, then a sudden knot of stores, the lights of a drugstore behind fogged glass, the fly-cluster of cars in front of the movie theater, a dark bank on a corner with a clock sticking out over the sidewalk and a group of people standing in the rain looking at its windows, as if they were some kind of a show. I went on. Empty fields closed in again.
Fate stage-managed the whole thing. Beyond Realito, just about a mile beyond, the highway took a curve and the rain fooled me and I went too close to the shoulder. My right front tire let go with an angry hiss. Before I could stop the right rear went with it. I jammed the car to a stop, half on the pavement, half on the shoulder, got out and flashed a spotlight around. I had two flats and one spare. The flat butt of a heavy galvanized tack stared at me from the front tire. The edge of the pavement was littered with them. They had been swept off, but not far enough off.
I snapped the flash off and stood there breathing rain and looking up a side road at a yellow light. It seemed to come from a skylight. The skylight could belong to a garage, the garage could be run by a man named Art Huck, and there could be a frame house next door to it. I tucked my chin down in my collar and started towards it, then went back to unstrap the license holder from the steering post and put it in my pocket. I leaned lower under the wheel. Behind a weighted flap, directly under my right leg as I sat in the car, there was a hidden compartment. There were two guns in it. One belonged to Eddie Mars' boy Lanny and one belonged to me. I took Lanny's. It would have had more practice than mine. I stuck it nose down in an inside pocket and started up the side road.
The garage was a hundred yards from the highway. It showed the highway a blank side wall. I played the flash on it quickly. "Art Huck-Auto Repairs and Painting." I chuckled, then Harry Jones' face rose up in front of me, and I stopped chuckling. The garage doors were shut, but there was an edge of light under them and a thread of light where the halves met. I went on past. The frame house was there, light in two front windows, shades down. It was set well back from the road, behind a thin clump of trees. A car stood on the gravel drive in front. It was dark, indistinct, but it would be a brown coupe and it would belong to Mr. Canino. It squatted there peacefully in front of the narrow wooden porch.
He would let her take it out for a spin once in a while, and sit beside her, probably with a gun handy. The girl Rusty Regan ought to have married, that Eddie Mars couldn't keep, the girl that hadn't run away with Regan. Nice Mr. Canino.
I trudged back to the garage and banged on the wooden door with the butt of my flash. There was a hung instant of silence, as heavy as thunder. The light inside went out. I stood there grinning and licking the rain off my lip. I clicked the spot on the middle of the doors. I grinned at the circle of white. I was where I wanted to be.
A voice spoke through the door, a surly voice:
"What you want?"
"Open up. I've got two flats back on the highway and only one spare. I need help."
"Sorry, mister. We're closed up. Realito's a mile west. Better try there."
I didn't like that. I kicked the door hard. I kept on kicking it. Another voice made itself heard, a purring voice, like a small dynamo behind a wall. I liked this voice. It said:
"A wise guy, huh? Open up, Art."
A bolt squealed and half of the door bent inward. My flash burned briefly on a gaunt face. Then something that glittered swept down and knocked the flash out on my hand. A gun had peaked at me. I dropped low where the flash burned on the wet ground and picked it up.
The surly voice said: "Kill that spot, bo. Folks get hurt that way."
I snapped the flash off and straightened. Light went on inside the garage, outlined a tall man in coveralls. He backed away from the open door and kept a gun leveled at me.
"Step inside and shut the door, stranger. We'll see what we can do."
I stepped inside, and shut the door behind my back. I looked at the gaunt man, but not at the other man who was shadowy over by a workbench, silent. The breath of the garage was sweet and sinister with the smell of hot pyroxylin paint.
"Ain't you got no sense?" the gaunt man chided me. "A bank job was pulled at Realito this noon."
"Pardon," I said, remembering the people staring at the bank in the rain. "I didn't pull it. I'm a stranger here."
"Well, there was," he said morosely. "Some say it was a couple of punk kids and they got 'em cornered back here in the hills."
"It's a nice night for hiding," I said. "I suppose they threw tacks out. I got some of them. I thought you just needed the business."
"You didn't ever get socked in the kisser, did you?" the gaunt man asked me briefly.
"Not by anybody your weight."
The purring voice from over in the shadows said:
"Cut out the heavy menace, Art. This guy's in a jam. You run a garage, don't you?"
"Thanks," I said, and didn't look at him even then.
"Okey, okey," the man in the coveralls grumbled. He tucked his gun through a flap in his clothes and bit a knuckle, staring at me moodily over it. The smell of the pyroxylin paint was as sickening as ether. Over in the corner, under a drop light, there was a big new looking sedan with a paint gun lying on its fender.
I looked at the man by the workbench now. He was short and thick-bodied with strong shoulders. He had a cool face and cool dark eyes. He wore a belted brown suede raincoat that was heavily spotted with rain. His brown hat was tilted rakishly. He leaned his back against the workbench and looked me over without haste, without interest, as if he was looking at a slab of cold meat. Perhaps he thought of people that way.
He moved his dark eyes up and down slowly and then glanced at his fingernails one by one, holding them up against the light and studying them with care, as Hollywood has taught it should be done. He spoke around a cigarette.
"Got two flats, huh? That's tough. They swept them tacks, I thought."
"I skidded a little on the curve."
"Stranger in town you said?"
"Traveling through. On the way to L.A. How far is it?"
"Forty miles. Seems longer this weather. Where from, stranger?"
"Santa Rosa."
"Come the long way, eh? Tahoe and Lone Pine?"
"Not Tahoe. Reno and Carson City."
"Still the long way." A fleeting smile curved his lips.
"Any law against it?" I asked him.
"Huh? No, sure not. Guess you think we're nosey. Just on account of that heist back there. Take a jack and get his flats, Art."
"I'm busy," the gaunt man growled. "I've got work to do. I got this spray job. And it's raining, you might have noticed."
The man in brown said pleasantly:
"Too damp for a good spray job, Art. Get moving."
I said: "They're front and rear, on the right side. You could use the spare for one spot, if you're busy."
"Take two jacks, Art," the brown man said.
"Now, listen -" Art began to bluster.
The brown man moved his eyes, looked at Art with a soft quiet-eyed stare, lowered them again almost shyly. He didn't speak. Art rocked as if a gust of wind had hit him. He stamped over to the corner and put a rubber coat over his coveralls, a sou'wester on his head. He grabbed a socket wrench and a hand jack and wheeled a dolly jack over to the doors.
He went out silently, leaving the door yawning. The rain blustered in. The man in brown strolled over and shut it and strolled back to the workbench and put his hips exactly where they had been before. I could have taken him then. We were alone. He didn't know who I was. He looked at me lightly and threw his cigarette on the cement floor and stamped on it without looking down.
"I bet you could use a drink," he said. "Wet the inside and even up."
He reached a bottle from the workbench behind him and set it on the edge and set two glasses beside it. He poured a stiff jolt into each and held one out. Walking like a dummy I went over and took it. The memory of the rain was still cold on my face. The smell of hot paint drugged the close air of the garage.
"That Art," the brown man said. "He's like all mechanics. Always got his face in a job he ought to have done last week. Business trip?"
I sniffed my drink delicately. It had the right smell. I watched him drink some of his before I swallowed mine. I rolled it around on my tongue. There was no cyanide in it. I emptied the little glass and put it down beside him and moved away.
"Partly," I said. I walked over to the half-painted sedan with the big metal paint gun lying along its fender. The rain hit the flat roof hard. Art was out in it, cursing.
The brown man looked at the big car.
"Just a panel job, to start with," he said casually, his purring voice still softer from the drink. "But the guy had dough and his driver needed a few bucks. You know the racket."
I said: "There's only one that's older."
My lips felt dry. I didn't want to talk. I lit a cigarette. I wanted my tires fixed. The minutes passed on tiptoe. The brown man and I were two strangers chance-met, looking at each other across a little dead man named Harry Jones. Only the brown man didn't know that yet.
Feet crunched outside and the door was pushed open. The light hit pencils of rain and made silver wires of them. Art trundled two muddy flats in sullenly, kicked the door shut, let one of the flats fall over on its side. He looked at me savagely.
"You sure pick spots for a jack to stand on," he snarled.
The brown man laughed and took a rolled cylinder of nickles out of his pocket and tossed it up and down on the palm of his hand.
"Don't crab so much," he said dryly. "Fix those flats."
"I'm fixin' them, ain't I?"
"Well, don't make a song about it."
"Yah!" Art peeled his rubber coat and sou'wester off and threw them away from him. He heaved one tire up on a spreader and tore the rim loose viciously. He had the tube out and cold-patched in nothing flat. Still scowling, he strode over to the wall beside me and grabbed an air hose, put enough air into the tube to give it body and let the nozzle of the air hose smack against the whitewashed wall.
I stood watching the roll of wrapped coins dance in Canino's hand. The moment of crouched intensity had left me. I turned my head and watched the gaunt mechanic beside me toss the air-stiffened tube up and catch it with his hands wide, one on each side of the tube. He looked it over sourly, glanced at a big galvanized tub of dirty water in the corner and grunted.
The teamwork must have been very nice. I saw no signal, no glance of meaning, no gesture that might have a special import. The gaunt man had the stiffened tube high in the air, staring at it. He half turned his body, took one long quick step, and slammed it down over my head and shoulders, a perfect ringer.
He jumped behind me and leaned hard on the rubber. His weight dragged on my chest, pinned my upper arms tight to my sides. I could move my hands, but I couldn't reach the gun in my pocket.
The brown man came almost dancing towards me across the floor. His hand tightened over the roll of nickels. He came up to me without sound, without expression. I bent forward and tried to heave Art off his feet.
The fist with the weighted tube inside it went through my spread hands like a stone through a cloud of dust. I had the stunned moment of shock when the lights danced and the visible world went out of focus but was still there. He hit me again. There was no sensation in my head. The bright glare got brighter. There was nothing but hard aching white light. Then there was darkness in which something red wriggled like a germ under a microscope. Then there was nothing bright or wriggling, just darkness and emptiness and a rushing wind and a falling as of great trees.
It seemed there was a woman and she was sitting near a lamp, which was where she belonged, in a good light. Another light shone hard on my face, so I closed my eyes again and tried to look at her through the lashes. She was so platinumed that her hair shone like a silver fruit bowl. She wore a green knitted dress with a broad white collar turned over it. There was a sharp-angled glossy bag at her feet. She was smoking and a glass of amber fluid was tall and pale at her elbow.
I moved my head a little, carefully. It hurt, but not more than I expected. I was trussed like a turkey ready for the oven. Handcuffs held my wrists behind me and a rope went from them to my ankles and then over the end of the brown davenport on which I was sprawled. The rope dropped out of sight over the davenport. I moved enough to make sure it was tied down.
I stopped these furtive movements and opened my eyes again and said:
"Hello."
The woman withdrew her gaze from some distant mountain peak. Her small firm chin turned slowly. Her eyes were the blue of mountain lakes. Overhead the rain still pounded, with a remote sound, as if it was somebody else's rain.
"How do you feel?" It was a smooth silvery voice that matched her hair. It had a tiny tinkle in it, like bells in a doll's house. I thought that was silly as soon as I thought of it.
"Great," I said. "Somebody built a filling station on my jaw."
"What did you expect, Mr. Marlowe - orchids?"
"Just a plain pine box," I said. "Don't bother with bronze or silver handles. And don't scatter my ashes over the blue Pacific. I like the worms better. Did you know that worms are of both sexes and that any worm can love any other worm?"
"You're a little light-headed," she said, with a grave stare.
"Would you mind moving this light?"
She got up and went behind the davenport. The light went off. The dimness was a benison.
"I don't think you're so dangerous," she said.
She was tall rather than short, but no bean-pole. She was slim, but not a dried crust. She went back to her chair.
"So you know my name."
"You slept well. They had plenty of time to go through your pockets. They did everything but embalm you. So you're a detective."
"Is that all they have on me?"
She was silent. Smoke floated dimly from the cigarette. She moved it in the air. Her hand was small and had shape, not the usual bony garden tool you see on women nowadays.
"What time is it?" I asked.
She looked sideways at her wrist, beyond the spiral of smoke, at the edge of the grave luster of the lamplight.
"Ten-seventeen. You have a date?"
"I wouldn't be surprised. Is this the house next to Art Huck's garage?"
"Yes."
"What are the boys doing - digging a grave?"
"They had to go somewhere."
"You mean they left you here alone?"
Her head turned slowly again. She smiled.
"You don't look dangerous."
"I thought they were keeping you a prisoner."
It didn't seem to startle her. It even slightly amused her.
"What made you think that?"
"I know who you are."
Her very blue eyes flashed so sharply that I could almost see the sweep of their glance, like the sweep of a sword. Her mouth tightened. But her voice didn't change.
"Then I'm afraid you're in a bad spot. And I hate killing."
"And you Eddie Mars' wife? Shame on you."
She didn't like that. She glared at me. I grinned.
"Unless you can unlock these bracelets, which I'd advise you not to do, you might spare me a little of that drink you're neglecting."
She brought the glass over. Bubbles rose in it like false hopes. She bent over me. Her breath was as delicate as the eyes of a fawn. I gulped from the glass. She took it away from my mouth and watched some of the liquid run down my neck. She bent over me again. Blood began to move around in me, like a prospective tenant looking over a house.
"Your face looks like a collision mat," she said.
"Make the most of it. It won't last long even this good."
She swung her head sharply and listened. For an instant her face was pale. The sounds were only the rain drifting against the walls. She went back across the room and stood with her side to me, bent forward a little, looking down at the floor.
"Why did you come here and stick your neck out?" she asked quietly. "Eddie wasn't doing you any harm. You know perfectly well that if I hadn't hid out here, the police would have been certain Eddie murdered Rusty Regan."
"He did," I said.
She didn't move, didn't change position an inch. Her breath made a harsh quick sound. I looked around the room. Two doors, both in the same wall, one half open. A carpet of red and tan squares, blue curtains at the windows, a wallpaper with bright green pine trees on it. The furniture looked as if it had come from one of those places that advertise on bus benches. Gay, but full of resistance.
She said softly: "Eddie didn't do anything to him. I haven't seen Rusty in months. Eddie's not that sort of man."
"You left his bed and board. You were living alone. People at the place where you lived identified Regan's photo."
"That's a lie," she said coldly.
I tried to remember whether Captain Gregory had said that or not. My head was too fuzzy. I couldn't be sure.
"And it's none of your business," she added.
"The whole thing is my business. I'm hired to find out."
"Eddie's not that sort of man."
"Oh, you like racketeers."
"As long as people will gamble there will be places for them to gamble."
"That's just protective thinking. Once outside the law you're all the way outside. You think he's just a gambler. I think he's a pornographer, a blackmailer, a hot car broker, a killer by remote control, and a suborner of crooked cops. He's whatever looks good to him, whatever has the cabbage pinned to it. Don't try to sell me on any high-souled racketeers. They don't come in that pattern."
"He's not a killer." Her nostrils flared.
"Not personally. He has Canino. Canino killed a man tonight, a harmless little guy who was trying to help somebody out. I almost saw him killed."
She laughed wearily.
"All right," I growled. "Don't believe it. If Eddie is such a nice guy, I'd like to get to talk to him without Canino around. You know what Canino will do - beat my teeth out and then kick me in the stomach for mumbling."
She put her head back and stood there thoughtful and withdrawn, thinking something out.
"I thought platinum hair was out of style," I bored on, just to keep sound alive in the room, just to keep from listening.
"It's a wig, silly. While mine grows out." She reached up and yanked it off. Her own hair was clipped short all over, like a boy's. She put the wig back on.
"Who did that to you?"
She looked surprised.
"I had it done. Why?"
"Yes. Why?"
"Why, to show Eddie I was willing to do what he wanted me to do - hide out. That he didn't need to have me guarded. I wouldn't let him down. I love him."
"Good grief," I groaned. "And you have me right here in the room with you."
She turned a hand over and stared at it. Then abruptly she walked out of the room. She came back with a kitchen knife. She bent and sawed at my rope.
"Canino has the key to the handcuffs," she breathed. "I can't do anything about those." She stepped back, breathing rapidly. She had cut the rope at every knot. "You're a kick," she said. "Kidding with every breath - the spot you're in."
"I thought Eddie wasn't a killer."
She turned away quickly and went back to her chair by the lamp and sat down and put her face in her hands. I swung my feet to the floor and stood up. I tottered around, stifflegged. The nerve on the left side of my face was jumping in all its branches. I took a step. I could still walk. I could run, if I had to.
"I guess you mean me to go," I said.
She nodded without lifting her head.
"You'd better go with me - if you want to keep on living."
"Don't waste time. He'll be back any minute."
"Light a cigarette for me."
I stood beside her, touching her knees. She came to her feet with a sudden lurch. Our eyes were only inches apart.
"Hello, Silver-Wig," I said softly.
She stepped back, around the chair, and swept a package of cigarettes up off the table. She jabbed one loose and pushed it roughly into my mouth. Her hand was shaking. She snapped a small green leather lighter and held it to the cigarette. I drew in the smoke, staring into her lake-blue eyes. While she was still close to me I said:
"A little bird named Harry Jones led me to you. A little bird that used to hop in and out of cocktail bars picking up horse bets for crumbs. Picking up information too. This little bird picked up an idea about Canino. One way and another he and his friends found out where you were. He came to me to sell the information because he knew - how he knew is a long story - that I was working for General Sternwood. I got his information, but Canino got the little bird. He's a dead little bird now, with his feathers ruffled and his neck limp and a pearl of blood on his beak. Canino killed him. But Eddie Mars wouldn't do that, would he, Silver-Wig? He never killed anybody. He just hires it done."
"Get out," she said harshly. "Get out of here quick." Her hand clutched in midair on the green lighter. The fingers strained. The knuckles were as white as snow.
"But Canino doesn't know I know that," I said. "About the little bird. All he knows is I'm nosing around."
Then she laughed. It was almost a racking laugh. It shook her as the wind shakes a tree. I thought there was puzzlement in it, not exactly surprise, but as if a new idea had been added to something already known and it didn't fit. Then I thought that was too much to get out of a laugh.
"It's very funny," she said breathlessly. "Very funny, because, you see - I still love him. Women -" She began to laugh again.
I listened hard, my head throbbing. Just the rain still.
"Let's go," I said. "Fast."
She took two steps back and her face set hard. "Get out, you! Get out! You can walk to Realito. You can make it - and you can keep your mouth shut - for an hour or two at least. You owe me that much."
"Let's go," I said. "Got a gun, Silver-Wig?"
"You know I'm not going. You know that. Please, please get out of here quickly."
I stepped up close to her, almost pressing against her. "You're going to stay here after turning me loose? Wait for that killer to come back so you can say so sorry? A man who kills like swatting a fly. Not much. You're going with me, Silver-Wig."
"No."
"Suppose," I said thinly. "Your handsome husband did kill Regan? Or suppose Canino did, without Eddie's knowing it. Just suppose. How long will you last, after turning me loose?"
"I'm not afraid of Canino. I'm still his boss's wife."
"Eddie's a handful of mush," I snarled. "Canino would take him with a teaspoon. He'll take him the way the cat took the canary. A handful of mush. The only time a girl like you goes for a wrong gee is when he's a handful of mush."
"Get out!" she almost spit at me.
"Okey." I turned away from her and moved out through the half-open door into a dark hallway.
Then she rushed after me and pushed past to the front door and opened it. She peered out into the wet blackness and listened. She motioned me forward.
"Good-by," she said under her breath. "Good luck in everything but one thing. Eddie didn't kill Rusty Regan. You'll find him alive and well somewhere, when he wants to be found."
I leaned against her and pressed her against the wall with my body. I pushed my mouth against her face. I talked to her that way.
"There's no hurry. All this was arranged in advance, rehearsed to the last detail, timed to the split second. Just like a radio program. No hurry at all. Kiss me, Silver-Wig."
Her face under my mouth was like ice. She put her hands up and took hold of my head and kissed me hard on the lips. Her lips were like ice, too.
I went out through the door and it closed behind me, without sound, and the rain blew in under the porch, not as cold as her lips.
The garage next door was dark. I crossed the gravel drive and a patch of sodden lawn. The road ran with small rivulets of water. It gurgled down a ditch on the far side. I had no hat. That must have fallen in the garage. Canino hadn't bothered to give it back to me. He hadn't thought I would need it any more. I imagined him driving back jauntily through the rain, alone, having left the gaunt and sulky Art and the probably stolen sedan in a safe place. She loved Eddie Mars and she was hiding to protect him. So he would find her there when he came back, calm beside the light and the untasted drink, and me tied up on the davenport. He would carry her stuff out to the car and go through the house carefully to make sure nothing incriminating was left. He would tell her to go out and wait. She wouldn't hear a shot. A blackjack is just as effective at short range. He would tell her he had left me tied up and I would get loose after a while. He would think she was that dumb. Nice Mr. Canino.
The raincoat was open in front and I couldn't button it, being handcuffed. The skirts flapped against my legs like the wings of a large and tired bird. I came to the highway. Cars went by in a wide swirl of water illuminated by headlights. The tearing noise of their tires died swiftly. I found my convertible where I had left it, both tires fixed and mounted, so it could be driven away, if necessary. They thought of everything. I got into it and leaned down sideways under the wheel and fumbled aside the flap of leather that covered the pocket. I got the other gun, stuffed it up under my coat and started back. The world was small, shut in, black. A private world for Canino and me.
Halfway there the headlights nearly caught me. They turned swiftly off the highway and I slid down the bank into the wet ditch and flopped there breathing water. The car hummed by without slowing. I lifted my head, heard the rasp of its tires as it left the road and took the gravel of the driveway. The motor died, the lights died, a door slammed. I didn't hear the house door shut, but a fringe of light trickled through the clump of trees, as though a shade had been moved aside from a window, or the light had been put on in the hall.
I came back to the soggy grass plot and sloshed across it. The car was between me and the house, the gun was down at my side, pulled as far around as I could get it, without pulling my left arm out by the roots. The car was dark, empty, warm. Water gurgled pleasantly in the radiator. I peered in at the door. The keys hung on the dash. Canino was very sure of himself. I went around the car and walked carefully across the gravel to the window and listened. I couldn't hear any voices, any sound but the swift bong-bong of the raindrops hitting the metal elbows at the bottom of the rain gutters.
I kept on listening. No loud voices, everything quiet and refined. He would be purring at her and she would be telling him she had let me go and I had promised to let them get away. He wouldn't believe me, as I wouldn't believe him. So he wouldn't be in there long. He would be on his way and take her with him. All I had to do was wait for him to come out.
I couldn't do it. I shifted the gun to my left hand and leaned down to scoop up a handful of gravel. I tossed it against the screen of the window. It was a feeble effort. Very little of it reached the glass above the screen, but the loose rattle of that little was like a dam bursting.
I ran back to the car and got on the running board behind it. The house had already gone dark. That was all. I dropped quietly on the running board and waited. No soap. Canino was too cagey.
I straightened up and got into the car backwards, fumbled around for the ignition key and turned it. I reached with my foot, but the starter button had to be on the dash. I found it at last, pulled it and the starter ground. The warm motor caught at once. It purred softly, contentedly. I got out of the car again and crouched down by the rear wheels.
I was shivering now but I knew Canino wouldn't like that last effect. He needed that car badly. A darkened window slid down inch by inch, only some shifting of light on the glass showing it moved. Flame spouted from it abruptly, the blended roar of three swift shots. Glass starred in the coupe. I yelled with agony. The yell went off into a wailing groan. The groan became a wet gurgle, choked with blood. I let the gurgle die sickeningly, one choked gasp. It was nice work. I liked it. Canino liked it very much. I heard him laugh. It was a large booming laugh, not at all like the purr of his speaking voice.
Then silence for a little while, except for the rain and the quietly throbbing motor of the car. Then the house door crawled open, a deeper blackness in the black night. A figure showed in it cautiously, something white around the neck. It was her collar. She came out on the porch stiffly, a wooden woman. I caught the pale shine of her silver wig. Canino came crouched methodically behind her. It was so deadly it was almost funny.
She came down the steps. Now I could see the white stiffness of her face. She started towards the car. A bulwark of defense for Canino, in case I could still spit in his eye. Her voice spoke through the lisp of the rain, saying slowly, without any tone:
"I can't see a thing, Lash. The windows are misted."
He grunted something and the girl's body jerked hard, as though he had jammed a gun into her back. She came on again and drew near the lightless car. I could see him behind her now, his hat, a side of his face, the bulk of his shoulder. The girl stopped rigid and screamed. A beautiful thin tearing scream that rocked me like a left hook.
"I can see him!" she screamed. "Through the window. Behind the wheel, Lash!"
He fell for it like a bucket of lead. He knocked her roughly to one side and jumped forward, throwing his hand up. Three more spurts of flame cut the darkness. More glass scarred. One bullet went on through and smacked into a tree on my side. A ricochet whined off into the distance. But the motor went quietly on.
He was low down, crouched against the gloom, his face a grayness without form that seemed to come back slowly after the glare of the shots. If it was a revolver he had, it might be empty. It might not. He had fired six times, but he might have reloaded inside the house. I hoped he had. I didn't want him with an empty gun. But it might be an automatic.
I said: "Finished?"
He whirled at me. Perhaps it would have been nice to allow him another shot or two, just like a gentleman of the old school. But his gun was still up and I couldn't wait any longer. Not long enough to be a gentleman of the old school. I shot him four times, the Colt straining against my ribs. The gun jumped out of his hand as if it had been kicked. He reached both his hands for his stomach. I could hear them smack hard against his body. He fell like that, straight forward, holding himself together with his broad hands. He fell face down in the wet gravel. And after that there wasn't a sound from him.
Silver-Wig didn't make a sound either. She stood rigid, with the rain swirling at her. I walked around Canino and kicked his gun, without any purpose. Then I walked after it and bent over sideways and picked it up. That put me close beside her. She spoke moodily, as if she was talking to herself.
"I- I was afraid you'd come back."
I said: "We had a date. I told you it was all arranged." I began to laugh like a loon.
Then she was bending down over him, touching him. And after a little while she stood up with a small key on a thin chain.
She said bitterly: "Did you have to kill him?"
I stopped laughing as suddenly as I had started. She went behind me and unlocked the handcuffs.
"Yes," she said softly. "I suppose you did."
This was another day and the sun was shining again.
Captain Gregory of the Missing Persons Bureau looked heavily out of his office window at the barred upper floor of the Hall of Justice, white and clean after the rain. Then he turned ponderously in his swivel chair and tamped his pipe with a heat-scarred thumb and stared at me bleakly.
"So you got yourself in another jam."
"Oh, you heard about it."
"Brother, I sit here all day on my fanny and I don't look as if I had a brain in my head. But you'd be surprised what I hear. Shooting this Canino was all right I guess, but I don't figure the homicide boys pinned any medals on you."
"There's been a lot of killing going on around me," I said. "I haven't been getting my share of it."
He smiled patiently.
"Who told you this girl out there was Eddie Mars' wife?"
I told him. He listened carefully and yawned. He tapped his gold-studded mouth with a palm like a tray.
"I guess you figure I ought to of found her."
"That's a fair deduction."
"Maybe I knew," he said. "Maybe I thought if Eddie and his woman wanted to play a little game like that, it would be smart - or as smart as I ever get - to let them think they were getting away with it. And then again maybe you think I was letting Eddie get away with it for more personal reasons." He held his big hand out and revolved the thumb against the index and second fingers.
"No," I said. "I didn't really think that. Not even when Eddie seemed to know all about our talk here the other day."
He raised his eyebrows as if raising them was an effort, a trick he was out of practice on. It furrowed his whole forehead and when it smoothed out it was full of white lines that turned reddish as I watched them.
"I'm a copper," he said. "Just a plain ordinary copper. Reasonably honest. As honest as you could expect a man to be in a world where it's out of style. That's mainly why I asked you to come in this morning. I'd like you to believe that. Being a copper I like to see the law win. I'd like to see the flashy well-dressed mugs like Eddie Mars spoiling their manicures in the rock quarry at Folsom, alongside of the poor little slum-bred hard guys that got knocked over on their first caper and never had a break since. That's what I'd like. You and me both lived too long to think I'm likely to see it happen. Not in this town, not in any town half this size, in any part of this wide, green and beautiful U.S.A. We just don't run our country that way."
I didn't say anything. He blew smoke with a backward jerk of his head, looked at the mouthpiece of his pipe and went on:
"But that don't mean I think Eddie Mars bumped off Regan or had any reason to or would have done it if he had. I just figured maybe he knows something about it, and maybe sooner or later something will sneak out into the open. Hiding his wife out at Realito was childish, but it's the kind of childishness a smart monkey thinks is smart. I had him in here last night, after the D.A. got through with him. He admitted the whole thing. He said he knew Canino as a reliable protection guy and that's what he had him for. He didn't know anything about his hobbies or want to. He didn't know Harry Jones. He didn't know Joe Brody. He did know Geiger, of course, but claims he didn't know about his racket. I guess you heard all that."
"Yes."
"You played it smart down there at Realito, brother. Not trying to cover up. We keep a file on unidentified bullets nowadays. Someday you might use that gun again. Then you'd be over a barrel."
"I played it smart," I said, and leered at him.
He knocked his pipe out and stared down at it broodingly.
"What happened to the girl?" he asked, not looking up.
"I don't know. They didn't hold her. We made statements, three sets of them, for Wilde, for the Sheriff's office, for the Homicide Bureau. They turned her loose. I haven't seen her since. I don't expect to."
"Kind of a nice girl, they say. Wouldn't be one to play dirty games."
"Kind of a nice girl," I said.
Captain Gregory sighed and rumpled his mousy hair. "There's just one more thing," he said almost gently. "You look like a nice guy, but you play too rough. If you really want to help the Sternwood family - leave 'em alone."
"I think you're right, Captain."
"How do you feel?"
"Swell," I said. "I was standing on various pieces of carpet most of the night, being balled out. Before that I got soaked to the skin and beaten up. I'm in perfect condition."
"What the hell did you expect, brother?"
"Nothing else."
I stood up and grinned at him and started for the door. When I had almost reached it he cleared his throat suddenly and said in a harsh voice:
"I'm wasting my breath, huh? You still think you find Regan."
I turned around and looked him straight in eyes
"No, I don't think I can find Regan. I'm not even going to try. Does that suit you?"
He nodded slowly. Then he shrugged.
"I don't know what the hell I even said that for. Good luck, Marlowe. Drop around any time."
"Thanks, Captain."
I went down out of the City Hall and got my car from the parking lot and drove home to the Hobart Arms. I lay down on the bed with my coat off and stared at the ceiling and listened to the traffic sounds on the street outside and watched the sun move slowly across a corner of the ceiling. I tried to go to sleep, but sleep didn't come. I got up and took a drink, although it was the wrong time of day, and lay down again. I still couldn't go to sleep. My brain ticked like a clock. I sat up on the side of the bed and stuffed a pipe and said out loud:
"That old buzzard knows something."
The pipe tasted as bitter as lye. I put it aside and lay down again. My mind drifted through waves of false memory, in which I seemed to do the same thing over and over again, go to the same places, meet the same people, say the same words to them, over and and over again, and yet each time it seemed real, like something actually happening, and for the first time. I was driving hard along the highway through the rain, with Silver-Wig in the corner of the car, saying nothing, so that by the time we reached Los Angeles we seemed to be utter strangers again. I was getting out at an all night drugstore and phoning Bernie Ohls that I had killed a man at Realito and was on my way over to Wilde's house with Eddie Mars' wife, who had seen me do it. I was pushing the car along the silent, rain-polished streets to Lafayette Park and up under the porte-cochere of Wilde's big frame house and the porch light was already on, Ohls having telephoned ahead that I was coming. I was in Wilde's study and he was behind his desk in a flowered dressing-gown and a tight hard face and a dappled cigar moved in his fingers and up to the bitter smile on his lips. Ohls was there and a slim gray scholarly man from the Sheriff's office who looked and talked more like a professor of economics than a cop. I was telling the story and they were listening quietly and Silver-Wig sat in a shadow with her hands folded in her lap, looking at nobody. There was a lot of telephoning. There were two men from the Homicide Bureau who looked at me as if I was some kind of strange beast escaped from a traveling circus.
I was driving again, with one of them beside me, to the Fulwider Building. We were there in the room where Harry Jones was still in the chair behind the desk, the twisted stiffness of his dead face and the soursweet smell in the room. There was a medical examiner, very young and husky, with red bristles on his neck. There was a fingerprint man fussing around and I was telling him not to forget the latch of the transom. (He found Canino's thumb print on it, the only print the brown man had left to back up my story.)
I was back again at Wilde's house, signing a typewritten statement his secretary had run off in another room. Then the door opened and Eddie Mars came in and an abrupt smile flashed to his face when he saw Silver-Wig, and he said: "Hello, sugar," and she didn't look at him or answer him. Eddie Mars, fresh and cheerful, in a dark business suit, with a fringed white scarf hanging outside his tweed overcoat. Then they were gone, everybody was gone out of the room but myself and Wilde, and Wilde was saying in a cold, angry voice: "This is the last time, Marlowe. The next fast one you pull I'll throw you to the lions, no matter whose heart it breaks."
It was like that, over and over again, lying on the bed and watching the patch of sunlight slide down the corner of the wall.
Then the phone rang, and it was Norris, the Sternwood butler, with his usual untouchable voice.
"Mr. Marlowe? I telephoned your office without success, so I took the liberty of trying to reach you at home."
"I was out most of the night," I said. "I haven't been down."
"Yes, sir. The General would like to see you this morning, Mr. Marlowe, if it's convenient."
"Half an hour or so," I said. "How is he?"
"He's in bed, sir, but not doing badly."
"Wait till he sees me," I said, and hung up.
I shaved, changed clothes and started for the door. Then I went back and got Carmen's little pearl-handled revolver and dropped it into my pocket. The sunlight was so bright that it danced. I got to the Sternwood place in twenty minutes and drove up under the arch at the side door. It was eleven-fifteen. The birds in the ornamental trees were crazy with song after the rain, the terraced lawns were as green as the Irish flag, and the whole estate looked as though it had been made about ten minutes before. I rang the bell. It was five days since I had rung it for the first time. It felt like a year.
A maid opened the door and led me along a side hall to the main hallway and left me there, saying Mr. Norris would be down in a moment. The main hallway looked just the same. The portrait over the mantel had the same hot black eyes and the knight in the stained-glass window still wasn't getting anywhere untying the naked damsel from the tree.
In a few minutes Norris appeared, and he hadn't changed either. His acid-blue eyes were as remote as ever, his grayish-pink skin looked healthy and rested, and he moved as if he was twenty years younger than he really was. I was the one who felt the weight of the years.
We went up the tiled staircase and turned the opposite way from Vivian's room. With each step the house seemed to grow larger and more silent. We reached a massive old door that looked as if it had come out of a church. Norris opened it softly and looked in. Then he stood aside and I went in past him across what seemed to be about a quarter of a mile of carpet to a huge canopied bed like the one Henry the Eighth died in.
General Sternwood was propped up on pillows. His bloodless hands were clasped on top of the sheet. They looked gray against it. His black eyes were still full of fight and the rest of his face still looked like the face of a corpse.
"Sit down, Mr. Marlowe." His voice sounded weary and a little stiff.
I pulled a chair close to him and sat down. All the windows were shut tight. The room was sunless at that hour. Awnings cut off what glare there might be from the sky. The air had the faint sweetish smell of old age.
He stared at me silently for a long minute. He moved a hand, as if to prove to himself that he could still move it, then folded it back over the other. He said lifelessly:
"I didn't ask you to look for my son-in-law, Mr. Marlowe."
"You wanted me to, though."
"I didn't ask you to. You assume a great deal. I usually ask for what I want."
I didn't say anything.
"You have been paid," he went on coldly. "The money is of no consequence one way or the other. I merely feel that you have, no doubt unintentionally, betrayed a trust." He closed his eyes on that.
I said: "Is that all you wanted to see me about?"
He opened his eyes again, very slowly, as though the lids were made of lead.
"I suppose you are angry at that remark," he said.
I shook my head.
"You have an advantage over me, General. It's an advantage I wouldn't want to take away from you, not a hair of it. It's not much, considering what you have to put up with. You can say anything you like to me and I wouldn't think of getting angry. I'd like to offer you your money back. It may mean nothing to you. It might mean something to me."
"What does it mean to you?"
"It means I have refused payment for an unsatisfactory job. That's all."
"Do you do many unsatisfactory jobs?"
"A few. Everyone does."
"Why did you go to see Captain Gregory?"
I leaned back and hung an arm over the back of the chair. I studied his face. It told me nothing. I didn't know the answer to his question - no satisfactory answer.
I said: "I was convinced you put those Geiger notes up to me chiefly as a test, and that you were a little afraid Regan might somehow be involved in an attempt to blackmail you. I didn't know anything about Regan then. It wasn't until I talked to Captain Gregory that I realized Regan wasn't that sort of guy in all probability."
"That is scarcely answering my question."
I nodded.
"No. That is scarcely answering your question. I guess I just don't like to admit that I played a hunch. The morning I was here, after I left you out in the orchid house, Mrs. Regan sent for me. She seemed to assume I was hired to look for her husband and she didn't seem to like it. She let drop however that 'they' had found his car in a certain garage. The 'they' could only be the police. Consequently the police must know something about it. If they did, the Missing Persons Bureau would be the department that would have the case. I didn't know whether you had reported it, of course, or somebody else, or whether they had found the car through somebody reporting it abandoned in a garage. But I know cops, and I knew that if they got that much, they would get a little more - especially as your driver happened to have a police record. I didn't know how much more they would get. That started me thinking about the Missing Persons Bureau. What convinced me was something in Mr. Wilde's manner the night we had the conference over at his house about Geiger and so on. We were alone for a minute and he asked me whether you had told me you were looking for Regan. I said you had told me you wished you knew where he was and that he was all right. Wilde pulled his lip in and looked funny. I knew just as plainly as though he had said it that by 'looking for Regan' he meant using the machinery of the law to look for him. Even then I tried to go up against Captain Gregory in such a way that I wouldn't tell him anything he didn't know already."
"And you allowed Captain Gregory to think I had employed you to find Rusty?"
"Yeah. I guess I did - when I was sure he had the case."
He closed his eyes. They twitched a little.
He spoke with them closed. "And do you consider that ethical?"
"Yes," I said. "I do."
The eyes opened again. The piercing blackness of them was startling coming suddenly out of that dead face.
"Perhaps I don't understand," he said.
"Maybe you don't. The head of a Missing Persons Bureau isn't a talker. He wouldn't be in that office if he was. This one is a very smart cagey guy who tries, with a lot of success at first, to give the impression he's a middle-aged hack fed up with his job. The game I play is not spillikins. There's always a large element of bluff connected with it. Whatever I might say to a cop, he would be apt to discount it. And to that cop it wouldn't make much difference what I said. When you hire a boy in my line of work it isn't like hiring a window-washer and showing him eight windows and saying: 'Wash those and you're through.' You don't know what I have to go through or over or under to do your job for you. I do it my way. I do my best to protect you and I may break a few rules, but I break them in your favor. The client comes first, unless he's crooked. Even then all I do is hand the job back to him and keep my mouth shut. After all you didn't tell me not to go to Captain Gregory."
"That would have been rather difficult," he said with a faint smile.
"Well, what have I done wrong? Your man Norris seemed to think when Geiger was eliminated the case was over. I don't see it that way. Geiger's method of approach puzzled me and still does. I'm not Sherlock Holmes or Philo Vance. I don't expect to go over ground the police have covered and pick up a broken pen point and build a case from it. If you think there is anybody in the detective business making a living doing that sort of thing, you don't know much about cops. It's not things like that they overlook, if they overlook anything. I'm not saying they often overlook anything when they're really allowed to work. But if they do, it's apt to be something looser and vaguer, like a man of Geiger's type sending you his evidence of debt and asking you to pay like a gentleman - Geiger, a man in a shady racket, in a vulnerable position, protected by a racketeer and having at least some negative protection from some of the police. Why did he do that? Because he wanted to find out if there was anything putting pressure on you. If there was, you would pay him. If not, you would ignore him and wait for his next move. But there was something putting a pressure on you. Regan. You were afraid he was not what he had appeared to be, that he had stayed around and been nice to you just long enough to find out how to play games with your bank account." He started to say something but I interrupted him.
"Even at that it wasn't your money you cared about. It wasn't even your daughters. You've more or less written them off. It's that you're still too proud to be played for a sucker - and you really liked Regan.
There was a silence.
Then the General said quietly:
"You talk too damn much, Marlowe. Am I to understand you are still trying to solve that puzzle?"
"No. I've quit. I've been warned off. The boys think I play too rough. That's why I thought I should give you back your money - because it isn't a completed job by my standards."
He smiled.
"Quit, nothing, he said. "I'll pay you another thousand dollars to find Rusty. He doesn't have to come back. I don't even have to know where he is. A man has a right to live his own life. I don't blame him for walking out on my daughter, nor even for going so abruptly. It was probably a sudden impulse. I want to know that he is all right wherever he is. I want to know it from him directly, and if he should happen to need money, I should want him to have that also. Am I clear?"
I said: "Yes, General."
He rested a little while, lax on the bed, his eyes closed and dark-lidded, his mouth tight and bloodless. He was used up. He was pretty nearly licked. He opened his eyes again and tried to grin at me.
"I guess I'm a sentimental old goat," he said. "And no soldier at all. I took a fancy to that boy. He seemed pretty clean to me. I must be a little too vain about my judgment of character. Find him for me, Marlowe. Just find him."
"I'll try," I said. "You'd better rest now. I've talked your arm off."
I got up quickly and walked across the wide floor and out. He had his eyes shut again before I opened the door. His hands lay limp on the sheet. He looked a lot more like a dead man than most dead men look. I shut the door quietly and went back along the upper hall and down the stairs.
The butler appeared with my hat. I put it on and said:
"What do you think of him?"
"He's not as weak as he looks, sir."
"If he was, he'd be ready for burial. What did this Regan fellow have that bored into him so?"
The butler looked at me levelly and yet with a queer lack of expression.
"Youth, sir," he said. "And the soldier's eye."
"Like yours," I said.
"If I may say so, sir, not unlike yours."
"Thanks. How are the ladies this morning?"
He shrugged politely.
"Just what I thought," I said, and he opened the door for me.
I stood outside on the step and looked down the vistas of grassed terraces and trimmed trees and flowerbeds to the tall metal railing at the bottom of the gardens. I saw Carmen about halfway down, sitting on a stone bench, with her head between her hands, looking forlorn and alone.
I went down the red brick steps that led from terrace to terrace. I was quite close before she heard me. She jumped up and whirled like a cat. She wore the light blue slacks she had worn the first time I saw her. Her blond hair was the same loose tawny wave. Her face was white. Red spots flared in her cheeks as she looked at me. Her eyes were slaty.
"Bored?" I said.
She smiled slowly, rather shyly, then nodded quickly. Then she whispered:
"You're not mad at me?"
"I thought you were mad at me."
She put her thumb up and giggled. "I'm not." When she giggled I didn't like her any more. I looked around. A target hung on a tree about thirty feet away, with some darts sticking to it. There were three or four more on the stone bench where she had been sitting.
"For people with money you and your sister don't seem to have much fun," I said.
She looked at me under her long lashes. This was the look that was supposed to make me roll over on my back. I said:
"You like throwing those darts?"
"Uh-huh."
"That reminds me of something." I looked back towards the house. By moving about three feet I made a tree hide me from it. I took her little pearl-handled gun out of my pocket.
"I brought you back your artillery. I cleaned it and loaded it up. Take my tip - don't shoot it at people, unless you get to be a better shot. Remember?"
Her face went paler and her thin thumb dropped. She looked at me, then at the gun I was holding. There was a fascination in her eyes.
"Yes," she said, and nodded. Then suddenly: "Teach me to shoot."
"Huh?"
"Teach me how to shoot. I'd like that."
"Here? It's against the law."
She came close to me and took the gun out of my hand, cuddled her hand around the butt. Then she tucked it quickly inside her slacks, almost with a furtive movement, and looked around.
"I know where," she said in a secret voice. "Down by some of the old wells." She pointed off down the hill. "Teach me?"
I looked into her slaty blue eyes. I might as well have looked at a couple of bottle-tops.
"All right. Give me back the gun until I see if the place looks all right."
She smiled and made a mouth, then handed it back with a secret naughty air, as if she was giving me a key to her room. We walked up the steps and around to my car. The gardens seemed deserted. The sunshine was as empty as a headwaiter's smile. We got into the car and I drove down the sunken driveway and out through the gates.
"Where's Vivian?" I asked.
"Not up yet." She giggled.
I drove on down the hill through the quiet opulent streets with their faces washed by the rain, bore east to La Brea, then south. We reached the place she meant in about ten minutes.
"In there." She leaned out of the window and pointed.
It was a narrow dirt road, not much more than a track, like the entrance to some foothill ranch. A wide five-barred gate was folded back against a stump and looked as if it hadn't been shut in years. The road was fringed with tall eucalyptus trees and deeply rutted. Trucks had used it. It was empty and sunny now, but not yet dusty. The rain had been too hard and too recent. I followed the ruts along and the noise of city traffic grew curiously and quickly faint, as if this were not in the city at all, but far away in a daydream land. Then the oil-stained, motionless walkingbeam of a squat wooden derrick stuck up over a branch. I could see the rusty old steel cable that connected this walkingbeam with a half a dozen others. The beams didn't move, probably hadn't moved for a year. The wells were no longer pumping. There was a pile of rusted pipe, a loading platform that sagged at one end, half a dozen empty oil drums lying in a ragged pile. There was the stagnant, oil-scummed water of an old sump iridescent in the sunlight.
"Are they going to make a park of all this?" I asked.
She dipped her chin down and gleamed at me.
"It's about time. The smell of that sump would poison a herd of goats. This the place you had in mind?"
"Uh-huh. Like it?"
"It's beautiful."
I pulled up beside the loading platform. We got out. I listened. The hum of the traffic was a distant web of sound, like the buzzing of bees. The place was as lonely as a churchyard. Even after the rain the tall eucalyptus trees still looked dusty.
They always look dusty. A branch broken off by the wind had fallen over the edge of the sump and the flat leathery leaves dangled in the water.
I walked around the sump and looked into the pumphouse. There was some junk in it, nothing that looked like recent activity. Outside a big wooden bull wheel was tilted against the wall. It looked like a good place all right.
I went back to the car. The girl stood beside it preening her hair and holding it out in the sun.
"Gimme," she said, and held her hand out.
I took the gun out and put it in her palm. I bent down and picked up a rusty can.
"Take it easy now," I said. "It's loaded in all five. I'll go over and set this can in that square opening in the middle of that big wooden wheel. See?" I pointed. She ducked her head, delighted. "That's about thirty feet. Don't start shooting until I get back beside you. Okey?"
"Okey," she giggled.
I went back around the sump and set the can up in the middle of the bull wheel. It made a swell target. If she missed the can, which she was certain to do, she would probably hit the wheel. That would stop a small slug completely. However, she wasn't going to hit even that.
I went back towards her around the sump. When I was about ten feet from her, at the edge of the sump, she showed me all her sharp little teeth and brought the gun up and started to hiss.
I stopped dead, the sump water stagnant and stinking at my back.
"Stand there, you son of a bitch," she said.
The gun pointed at my chest. Her hand seemed to be quite steady. The hissing sound grew louder and her face had the scraped bone look. Aged, deteriorated, become animal, and not a nice animal.
I laughed at her. I started to walk towards her. I saw her small finger tighten on the trigger and grow white at the tip. I was about six feet away from her when she started to shoot.
The sound of the gun made a sharp slap, without body, a brittle crack in the sunlight. I didn't see any smoke. I stopped again and grinned at her.
She fired twice more, very quickly. I don't think any of the shots would have missed. There were five in the little gun. She had fired four. I rushed her.
I didn't want the last one in my face, so I swerved to one side. She gave it to me quite carefully, not worried at all. I think I felt the hot breath of the powder blast a little.
I straightened up.
"My, but you're cute," I said.
Her hand holding the empty gun began to shake violently. The gun fell out of it. Her mouth began to shake. Her whole face went to pieces. Then her head screwed up towards her left ear and froth showed on her lips. Her breath made a whining sound. She swayed.
I caught her as she fell. She was already unconscious. I pried her teeth open with both hands and stuffed a wadded handkerchief in between them. It took all my strength to do it. I lifted her up and got her into the car, then went back for the gun and dropped it into my pocket. I climbed in under the wheel, backed the car and drove back the way we had come along the rutted road, out of the gateway, back up the hill and so home.
Carmen lay crumpled in the corner of the car, without motion. I was halfway up the drive to the house before she stirred. Then her eyes suddenly opened wide and wild. She sat up.
"What happened?" she gasped.
"Nothing. Why?"
"Oh, yes it did," she giggled. "I wet myself."
"They always do," I said.
She looked at me with a sudden sick speculation and began to moan.
The gentle-eyed, horse-faced maid let me in the long gray and white upstairs sitting room with the ivory drapes tumbled extravagantly on the floor and the white carpet from wall to wall. A screen star's boudoir, a place of charm and seduction, artificial as a wooden leg. It was empty at the moment. The door closed behind me with the unnatural softness of a hospital door. A breakfast table on wheels stood by the chaise-longue. Its silver glittered. There were cigarette ashes in the coffee cup. I sat down and waited.
It seemed a long time before the door opened again and Vivian came in. She was in oyster-white lounging pajamas trimmed with white fur, cut as flowingly as a summer sea frothing on the beach of some small and exclusive island. She went past me in long smooth strides and sat down on the edge of the chaise-longue. There was a cigarette in her lips, at the corner of her mouth. Her nails today were copper red from quick to tip, without half moons.
"So you're just a brute after all," she said quietly, staring at me. "An utter callous brute. You killed a man last night. Never mind how I heard it. I heard it. And now you have to come out here and frighten my kid sister into a fit."
I didn't say a word. She began to fidget. She moved over to a slipper chair and put her head back against a white cushion that lay along the back of the chair against the wall. She blew pale gray smoke upwards and watched it float towards the ceiling and come apart in wisps that were for a little while distinguishable from the air and then melted and were nothing. Then very slowly she lowered her eyes and gave me a cool, hard glance.
"I don't understand you," she said. "I'm thankful as hell one of us kept his head the night before last. It's bad enough to have a bootlegger in my past. Why don't you for Christ's sake say something?"
"How is she?"
"Oh, she's all right, I suppose. Fast asleep. She always goes to sleep. What did you do to her?"
"Not a thing. I came out of the house after seeing your father and she was out in front. She had been throwing darts at a target on a tree. I went down to speak to her because I had something that belonged to her. A little revolver Owen Taylor gave her once. She took it over to Brody's place the other evening, the evening he was killed. I had to take it away from her there. I didn't mention it, so perhaps you didn't know it."
The black Sternwood eyes got large and empty. It was her turn not to say anything.
"She was pleased to get her little gun back and she wanted me to teach her how to shoot and she wanted to show me the old oil wells down the hill where your family made some of its money. So we went down there and the place was pretty creepy, all rusted metal and old wood and silent wells and greasy scummy sumps. Maybe that upset her. I guess you've been there yourself. It was kind of eerie."
"Yes - it is." It was a small breathless voice now.
"So we went in there and I stuck a can up in a bull wheel for her to pop at. She threw a wing-ding. Looked like a mild epileptic fit to me."
"Yes." The same minute voice. "She has them once in a while. Is that all you wanted to see me about?"
"I guess you still wouldn't tell me what Eddie Mars has on you."
"Nothing at all. And I'm getting a little tired of that question," she said coldly.
"Do you know a man named Canino?"
She drew her fine black brows together in thought.
"Vaguely. I seem to remember the name."
"Eddie Mars' trigger man. A tough hombre, they said. I guess he was. Without a little help from a lady I'd be where he is - in the morgue."
"The ladies seem to -" She stopped dead and whitened. "I can't joke about it," she said simply.
"I'm not joking, and if I seem to talk in circles, it just seems that way. It all ties together - everything. Geiger and his cute little blackmail tricks, Brody and his pictures, Eddie Mars and his roulette tables, Canino and the girl Rusty Regan didn't run away with. It all ties together."
"I'm afraid I don't even know what you're talking about."
"Suppose you did - it would be something like this. Geiger got his hooks into your sister, which isn't very difficult, and got some notes from her and tried to blackmail your father with them, in a nice way. Eddie Mars was behind Geiger, protecting him and using him for a cat's-paw. Your father sent for me instead of paying up, which showed he wasn't scared about anything. Eddie Mars wanted to know that. He had something on you and he wanted to know if he had it on the General too. If he had, he could collect a lot of money in a hurry. If not, he would have to wait until you got your share of the family fortune, and in the meantime be satisfied with whatever spare cash he could take away from you across the roulette table. Geiger was killed by Owen Taylor, who was in love with your silly little sister and didn't like the kind of games Geiger played with her. That didn't mean anything to Eddie. He was playing a deeper game than Geiger knew anything about, or than Brody knew anything about, or anybody except you and Eddie and a tough guy named Canino. Your husband disappeared and Eddie, knowing everybody knew there had been bad blood between him and Regan, hid his wife out at Realito and put Canino to guard her, so that it would look as if she had run away with Regan. He even got Regan's car into the garage of the place where Mona Mars had been living. But that sounds a little silly taken merely as an attempt to divert suspicion that Eddie had killed your husband or had him killed. It isn't so silly, really. He had another motive. He was playing for a million or so. He knew where Regan had gone and why and he didn't want the police to have to find out. He wanted them to have an explanation of the disappearance that would keep them satisfied. Am I boring you?"
"You tire me," she said in a dead, exhausted voice. "God, how you tire me!"
"I'm sorry. I'm not just fooling around trying to be clever. Your father offered me a thousand dollars this morning to find Regan. That's a lot of money to me, but I can't do it."
Her mouth jumped open. Her breath was suddenly strained and harsh.
"Give me a cigarette," she said thickly. "Why?" The pulse in her throat had begun to throb.
I gave her a cigarette and lit a match and held it for her. She drew in a lungful of smoke and let it out raggedly and then the cigarette seemed to be forgotten between her fingers. She never drew on it again.
"Well, the Missing Persons Bureau can't find him," I said. "It's not so easy. What they can't do it's not likely that I can do."
"Oh." There was a shade of relief in her voice.
"That's one reason. The Missing Persons people think he just disappeared on purpose, pulled down the curtain, as they call it. They don't think Eddie Mars did away with him."
"Who said anybody did away with him?"
"We're coming to it," I said.
For a brief instant her face seemed to come to pieces, to become merely a set of features without form or control. Her mouth looked like the prelude to a scream. But only for an instant. The Sternwood blood had to be good for something more than her black eyes and her recklessness.
I stood up and took the smoking cigarette from between her fingers and killed it in an ashtray. Then I took Carmen's little gun out of my pocket and laid it carefully, with exaggerated care, on her white satin knee. I balanced it there, and stepped back with my head on one side like a window-dresser getting the effect of a new twist of a scarf around a dummy's neck.
I sat down again. She didn't move. Her eyes came down millimeter by millimeter and looked at the gun.
"It's harmless," I said. "All five chambers empty. She fired them all. She fired them all at me."
The pulse jumped wildly in her throat. Her voice tried to say something and couldn't. She swallowed.
"From a distance of five or six feet," I said. "Cute little thing, isn't she? Too bad I had loaded the gun with blanks." I grinned nastily. "I had a hunch about what she would do - if she got the chance."
She brought her voice back from a long way off.
"You're a horrible man," she said. "Horrible."
"Yeah. You're her big sister. What are you going to do about it?"
"You can't prove a word of it."
"Can't prove what?"
"That she fired at you. You said you were down there around the wells with her, alone. You can't prove a word of what you say."
"Oh that," I said. "I wasn't thinking of trying. I was thinking of another time - when the shells in the little gun had bullets in them."
Her eyes were pools of darkness, much emptier than darkness.
"I was thinking of the day Regan disappeared," I said. "Late in the afternoon. When he took her down to those old wells to teach her to shoot and put up a can somewhere and told her to pop at it and stood near her while she shot. And she didn't shoot at the can. She turned the gun and shot him, just the way she tried to shoot me today, and for the same reason."
She moved a little and the gun slid off her knee and fell to the floor. It was one of the loudest sounds I ever heard. Her eyes were riveted on my face. Her voice was a stretched whisper of agony.
"Carmen! Merciful God, Carmen! ... Why?"
"Do I really have to tell you why she shot at me?"
"Yes." Her eyes were still terrible. "I'm- I'm afraid you do."
"Night before last when I got home she was in my apartment. She'd kidded the manager into letting her in to wait for me. She was in my bed - naked. I threw her out on her ear. I guess maybe Regan did the same thing to her sometime. But you can't do that to Carmen."
She drew her lips back and made a half-hearted attempt to lick them. It made her, for a brief instant, look like a frightened child. The lines of her cheeks sharpened and her hand went up slowly like an artificial hand worked by wires and its fingers closed slowly and stiffly around the white fur at her collar. They drew the fur tight against her throat. After that she just sat staring.
"Money," she croaked. "I suppose you want money."
"How much money?" I tried not to sneer.
"Fifteen thousand dollars?"
I nodded.
"That would be about right. That would be the established fee. That was what he had in his pockets when she shot him. That would be what Mr. Canino got for disposing of the body when you went to Eddie Mars for help. But that would be small change to what Eddie expects to collect one of these days, wouldn't it?"
"You son of a bitch!" she said.
"Uh-huh. I'm a very smart guy. I haven't a feeling or a scruple in the world. All I have the itch for is money. I am so money greedy that for twenty-five bucks a day and expenses, mostly gasoline and whiskey, I do my thinking myself, what there is of it; I risk my whole future, the hatred of the cops and of Eddie Mars and his pals. I dodge bullets and eat saps, and say thank you very much, if you have any more trouble, I hope you'll think of me, I'll just leave one of my cards in case anything comes up. I do all this for twenty-five bucks a day - and maybe just a little to protect what little pride a broken and sick old man has left in his blood, in the thought that his blood is not poison, and that although his two little girls are a trifle wild, as many nice girls are these days, they are not perverts or killers. And that makes me a son of a bitch. All right. I don't care anything about that. I've been called that by people of all sizes and shapes, including your little sister. She called me worse than that for not getting into bed with her. I got five hundred dollars from your father, which I didn't ask for, but he can afford to give it to me. I can get another thousand for finding Mr. Rusty Regan, if I could find him. Now you offer me fifteen grand. That makes me a big shot. With fifteen grand I could own a home and a new car and four suits of clothes. I might even take a vacation without worrying about losing a case. That's fine. What are you offering it to me for? Can I go on being a son of a bitch, or do I have to become a gentleman, like that lush that passed out in his car the other night?"
She was as silent as a stone woman.
"All right," I went on heavily. "Will you take her away? Somewhere far off from here where they can handle her type, where they will keep guns and knives and fancy drinks away from her? Hell, she might even get herself cured, you know. It's been done."
She got up and walked slowly to the windows. The drapes lay in heavy ivory folds beside her feet. She stood among the folds and looked out, towards the quiet darkish foothills. She stood motionless, almost blending into the drapes. Her hands hung loose at her sides. Utterly motionless hands. She turned and came back along the room and walked past me blindly. When she was behind me she caught her breath sharply and spoke.
"He's in the sump," she said. "A horrible decayed thing. I did it. I did just what you said. I went to Eddie Mars. She came home and told me about it, just like a child. She's not normal. I knew the police would get it all out of her. In a little while she would even brag about it. And if dad knew, he would call them instantly and tell them the whole story. And sometime in that night he would die. It's not his dying-it's what he would be thinking just before he died. Rusty wasn't a bad fellow. I didn't love him. He was all right, I guess. He just didn't mean anything to me, one way or another, alive or dead, compared with keeping it from dad."
"So you let her run around loose," I said, "getting into other jams."
"I was playing for time. Just for time. I played the wrong way, of course. I thought she might even forget it herself. I've heard they do forget what happens in those fits. Maybe she has forgotten it. I knew Eddie Mars would bleed me white, but I didn't care. I had to have help and I could only get it from somebody like him...... There have been times when I hardly believed it all myself. And other times when I had to get drunk quickly - whatever time of day it was. Awfully damn quickly."
"You'll take her away," I said. "And do that awfully damn quickly."
She still had her back to me. She said softly now:
"What about you?"
"Nothing about me. I'm leaving. I'll give you three days. If you're gone by then - okey. If you're not, out it comes. And don't think I don't mean that."
She turned suddenly.
"I don't know what to say to you. I don't know how to begin."
"Yeah. Get her out of here and see that she's watched every minute. Promise?"
"I promise. Eddie -"
"Forget Eddie. I'll go see him after I get some rest. I'll handle Eddie."
"He'll try to kill you."
"Yeah," I said. "His best boy couldn't. I'll take a chance on the others. Does Norris know?"
"He'll never tell."
"I thought he knew."
I went quickly away from her down the room and out and down the tiled staircase to the front hall. I didn't see anybody when I left. I found my hat alone this time. Outside, the bright gardens had a haunted look, as though small wild eyes were watching me from behind the bushes, as though the sunshine itself had a mysterious something in its light. I got into my car and drove off down the hill.
What did it matter where you lay once you were dead? In a dirty sump or in a marble tower on top of a high hill? You were dead, you were sleeping the big sleep, you were not bothered by things like that. Oil and water were the same as wind and air to you. You just slept the big sleep, not caring about the nastiness of how you died or where you fell. Me, I was part of the nastiness now. Far more a part of it than Rusty Regan was. But the old man didn't have to be. He could lie quiet in his canopied bed, with his bloodless hands folded on the sheet, waiting. His heart was a brief, uncertain murmur. His thoughts were as gray as ashes. And in a little while he too, like Rusty Regan, would be sleeping the big sleep.
On the way downtown I stopped at a bar and had a couple of double Scotches. They didn't do me any good. All they did was make me think of Silver-Wig, and I never saw her again.
Elexiandra tried not to crumple the invitation the crow had delivered as she read it, but her blood pressure rose until it pounded in her ears. The neat, embossed gold lettering was far too cheerful for the words written on the thick parchment.
She’d bet a lot of these invites had gone out through the mortal and Shadow Realms, and that at least a thousand immortals would accept and attend. She didn’t reside in the Shadow Realms, but—much to her dismay—King Tove of the dark fae must have decided to include at least some of the immortals who lived in the human realm on his invitation list.
“What is it, Lexi?” Sahira asked as she appeared at Lexi's side.
If Lexi showed her, Sahira would make her go. Her aunt would prattle on about proper etiquette and how exciting it was for them to get the chance to visit the Gloaming, the dark fae realm. But even if Sahira didn't force her to attend, Lexi had no idea how to get out of this.
How did she say no to the king of the dark fae?
She didn't, that was how. But why did he invite her?
Sure, her father was a general on the winning side of the war, but he perished in that war, and she was a half vamp, half human who had never entered a Shadow Realm before. The only things separating her from mortals were that she drank blood, as well as ate food, and she was an immortal.
She had no special abilities, no powers, and though she was stronger than a human, she wasn’t as strong as a full-blooded vampire. She was a nobody holding an invitation from one of the most powerful immortals in all the realms. And she would prefer to throw it away.
Lifting her head, Lexi pushed back a loose strand of auburn hair as she studied the large manor only fifty feet away from her. At one time, the thirty-room, gray stone building was beautiful and in pristine condition.
Then her father entered the war on the side of the “let's make our existence known to the humans” faction and everything changed.
But then, her father never really had a choice. It was either fight or die, and at least he chose the winning side, even if it wasn't necessarily the right one, but she would never voice that opinion out loud.
If he'd chosen the losing side, then the Lord would have most likely taken the manor from them or destroyed it, and she and Sahira would be on the run like all the other rebels.
She was still staring at her home when Sahira snatched the invitation from her hand.
"It’s an invitation to a ball!” Sahira gushed.
Lexi winced and braced herself for what was to come. She didn’t want to attend some fancy ball, but the sparkle in Sahira’s eyes said her aunt was already planning what they would wear.
The invitation specified attending in their finest attire, which meant ball gowns. That was all well and good, but she didn’t own anything fancy, and she wasn’t in the mood to go shopping.
“It’s to celebrate the end of the war,” Sahira said, “and the king of the dark fae’s sons for helping the Lord win.”
Some of Sahira’s enthusiasm vanished as she spoke. She may love the idea of a ball and fancy gowns, but they’d both lost a lot during the war and didn’t have anything to celebrate.
She’d lost her dad, and Sahira lost her half brother. They’d lost the luxurious life they once lived and most of the humans who once lived at or worked the manor grounds.
But they weren’t the only ones who lost a lot. The human realm lost its innocence about the existence of immortals as well as countless lives. Every day, they continued to lose more.
And the dark fae king planned to celebrate those losses. Lexi found this a little strange considering he’d lost more than half his sons in the war.
She bit her tongue as she lifted her head to gaze into the crow’s black eyes. When it tilted its head, the sun created a rainbow hue of colors throughout its feathers. The crow was the dark fae’s messenger, and it was waiting for her response.
She didn’t know what to say. The idea of going to the Gloaming was tempting, she’d love to see how the dark fae lived, but she still didn’t understand why she was holding this invite.
She’d never met a member of the royal dark fae before. She knew Colburn—or Cole as he was more commonly known—and Brokk were the only sons the king had left on his side. Out of his nine sons, five died in the war, and the other two survivors fought for the rebels.
Like everyone who chose the losing side, they were stripped of their titles, land, and money. They were being hunted throughout the realms.
Many of the rebels ended up in the mortal realm where there was less magic and they were harder to track. Many others hopped through the Shadow Realms to avoid capture and death.
“We need gowns,” Sahira continued, and Lexi closed her eyes. “We’ll have to go to the marketplace to purchase them. It will be fun.”
The two of them had drastically different ideas of fun, but at four hundred and fifty-three years old, Sahira was four hundred and twenty-nine years older than her. Her aunt had grown up and lived through far different times.
Sahira once attended balls held by kings and czars in the human realm while Lexi grew up in jeans and T-shirts. Sahira would sometimes talk about the old days with wistful sadness while Lexi’s old days were bowls of cereal in front of her favorite cartoons.
She often missed those days. They were much simpler, and her father was still alive.
This invitation was making Sahira’s year and ruining Lexi’s day. She dreaded everything about it, but she knew what she had to do.
Opening her eyes, Lexi used her finger to check the yes box for her and Sahira. Created by fae magic, a gold mark materialized on the invite. She lifted the invite into the air, and the crow swooped down to take it from her.
It clasped the invite in its talons, released a loud caw, and soared back toward the clear blue sky before vanishing.
With a sigh, Lexi looked beyond the manor to the smoke in the distance. She couldn’t see the ruined remains of the city a hundred miles away, but every day she saw the smoke rising from it.
A week ago, she dared to travel close enough to investigate the devastation the dragons unleashed on the city, but she was still a few miles away when the roar of a dragon caused her to retreat.
She preferred to stay as far from those beasts as possible.
The humans who survived the massacre continued to filter out of the city every day. She’d heard from some that others were choosing to stay behind to rebuild.
Every day, she watched as broken, ragtag groups of survivors fled the city in search of something more, but there wasn’t much left out there. Each morning, she walked out to the road to give those survivors food. Some stopped to talk, but most would simply look at her with haunted eyes before taking their bread and walking away.
The dragons unleashed a fair amount of destruction on the world, but most of their larger fires had been extinguished. Some smaller ones still popped up. Lexi had no idea what started them, and she wasn’t going into the city to find out, but their smoke filled the sky, and sometimes they burned for days.
The war ended a month ago. It was too soon to accomplish much rebuilding and far too soon to celebrate the destruction unleashed on so many.
Hell, she didn’t think what happened to Earth should ever be celebrated, but she was sure many other immortals would disagree… including the king of the dark fae.
Time was moving on, and the war was over. The immortals of the Shadow Realms wanted to continue with their lives. It didn’t matter that many in the mortal realm still suffered.
The winning side had gotten their way; immortals didn’t have to hide from humans anymore. The mortals were aware of their existence now, and that knowledge had ruined their lives.
Despite all that, a small tingle of excitement sparked in her belly. She would soon enter a Shadow Realm for the first time; vampires usually weren’t welcome there, not even half vamps.
And while there was a chance she and Sahira might get killed if they tried to cross into the Gloaming, she was excited to see what lay beyond the human realm.
Twilight was settling across the land as Lexi and Sahira stood before the growing shadows spreading throughout the forest across from them. It had taken them an hour to reach the designated entrance to the Gloaming, and Lexi clutched the invitation that would grant them passage like it was a life preserver in a storm-tossed sea.
Around her, half a dozen other immortals talked excitedly about what was to come, but Lexi couldn’t join in their enthusiasm. She was too nervous.
It had been a week since the invitation arrived. In that time, Sahira had managed to barter enough of her potions in the marketplace near their home to purchase two gowns for them.
Her aunt then spent the next couple of days getting those dresses to fit properly and adding special touches to them. They were some of the most beautiful creations Lexi had ever seen, but the exquisite gown only made Lexi feel more out of place. She’d never worn anything like it before.
The other immortals and her aunt were all at ease in their fancy clothes while she felt like an imposter. They were also all excited about traveling to the Gloaming, and she couldn’t help wondering if she would be allowed to make the journey.
Maybe the invite was sent to them by accident. Her dad did fight for the Lord, but she and Sahira were both half vampire, and vampires weren’t exactly welcome in the Shadow Realms. Neither were humans.
When the time came, would they try to enter the Gloaming only to be bounced back or, worse, destroyed?
She tugged at the collar of her dress as the possibility caused a sheen of sweat to dampen her skin.
Trying to distract herself from the risk of impending death, Lexi studied the two dark fae standing at the edge of the woods. They wore only loose-fitting brown pants; their chests and feet were bare. Like all purebred dark fae, they had black hair, black eyes, pointed ears, and lithe builds.
The shadows swallowed them until they flickered in and out of the spreading darkness created by the setting sun. However, the dark fae were known to be a part of the shadows.
From her distance of ten feet, she sensed their power, yet their ciphers didn’t go past the middle of their biceps. She’d only encountered a couple of dark fae before, but she knew those black markings indicated the amount of power they possessed.
They said the dark fae king and his sons possessed ciphers that extended to their wrists. The oldest supposedly had ciphers to the tips of his fingers, like the king.
Unable to stop herself, Lexi tugged at the collar of her gown again as the sun vanished. There was a moment when the entire world held its breath as the last of the sun’s rays stretched across the sky. Then the shimmering, deep purple entrance to the Gloaming came into view.
Sahira clasped Lexi’s arm and practically jumped up and down in excitement. Lexi tried not to gawk as the doorway shifted from deep purple to black and back again. The dark fae standing beside it stepped away from the trees and waved their arms toward the portal.
Lexi gulped and grasped Sahira’s hand on her arm. Her aunt was stunning in her maroon gown. Twisted into an elaborate coil, her mahogany hair hung against her nape, and black eyeliner emphasized the striking color of her amber eyes.
Most days, Sahira wore jeans and T-shirts like her. She kept her hair in a bun and eschewed makeup until she looked more like a librarian than the half witch, half vampire she was. Now, she’d embraced the roll of ball attendee.
“It’s okay,” Sahira whispered.
“What if the portal doesn’t let us enter? Vampires were banished to the mortal realm centuries ago.”
“It will let us enter, and if it doesn’t, then I’ll be stuck here with you, but we’re invited.”
“That might have been a mistake.”
“It wasn’t.”
“Vampires aren’t welcome in the Shadow Realms.”
“We have an invite, and vampires aren’t welcome to stay. They can travel through with permission, which we have. Come on, everything is going to be fine.”
Lexi wanted to believe her, but her feet remained planted firmly in place.
Sahira tugged at her arm. “Lexi, move!”
Lexi gulped and shuffled forward until she stood at the edge of the portal. Gathering her courage, she closed her eyes and stepped forward. She fully expected to be knocked back on her ass or cut in two, but her feet continued onward.
Her eyes flew open, and she discovered herself surrounded by the dark walls of the portal as she moved toward the Gloaming.
The growing crowd of immortals made Cole’s upper lip curl as he watched them group before the dais in their finest clothing. There was such an array of ball gowns, fine attire, and the tunics of the dark fae that his eye twitched.
The din of voices nearly drown out the music's melodic strains from the minstrels his father hired. Laughter floated on the air, and glasses clinked as the immortals congratulated each other on a well-won war.
A war that most of these self-congratulatory fuckers hadn’t fought.
Cole didn’t want to think about the amount of carisle his father spent on this affair. He knew his role here, but he hadn’t helped in planning it. There were numerous whispers about the dark fae king having bottomless coffers, so the money probably hadn’t mattered to his father.
And after the war, those coffers probably tripled as the winners stripped all the losers' lands and money. Thinking about it made his head hurt.
He’d never expected to long for the human world, but as the noise of the party increased, he would have given anything to be anywhere else.
After two years of waging countless bloody battles in a war he hadn’t agreed with, being around so many immortals made his skin itch. He kept expecting a witch or warlock to lob a ball of magic into the crowd or a pack of lycan to turn on the others. Instead, they laughed and drank as if all the death and destruction never occurred.
How short their memories are.
But then, they were immortals, so a couple years of bloody war was less than a blink of an eye in their lifespans. And most of those gathered here hadn’t stepped foot on any of the battlefields.
They stayed in their realms, in their towers, or by the Lord of the Shadow Realms and plotted the destruction of others. They did not actually fight, so to them, this was all good fun.
To Cole, it was a powder keg waiting to blow.
Before the war, he spent most of his six hundred and seventy-two years in the lap of luxury too. Because of fights and disputes, he’d killed his fair share of immortals during that time, but those deaths were nothing compared to the hundreds he handed out in the war.
Sometimes at night, he would find himself standing on those battlefields again. He was once more using his fae sword to carve his way through countless enemies as blood dripped from his clothes and hair.
The amount of blood coating him added a good ten pounds to his frame, but it didn’t hinder him. As he worked to destroy, the screams of the dying reverberated in his head as the injured pleaded for mercy.
Sometimes he would bolt awake, but other times it felt like he was clawing through quicksand as he struggled to pull himself free of the cloying horror of his memories. He often woke in a cold sweat and unsure of where he was, and it sometimes took a few minutes to recall the war was over.
While fighting the war, the death and destruction hadn’t bothered him. Since its end, it haunted him.
But the war was over; their side had won. That was all that mattered to the rest of the Shadow Realms. Or at least it was all that mattered to those who hadn’t fought in the war.
It’s over. Yet a part of him remained on the battlefields, and he suspected it always would.
“We’ve packed our palace with immortals who would gladly tear out each other’s throats,” Brokk muttered as he arrived to stand beside him.
“But these are our allies and friends, little brother,” Cole replied.
“The dark fae have no friends.”
Cole couldn’t have said it any better himself.
“Father says it’s time to take our place on the dais,” Brokk said.
Cole barely managed to keep from sneering at sitting on that dais in front of all these gawkers. However, this ball was to show they were ecstatic about the war's outcome, and he would do his part to keep up the charade.
Brokk adjusted the thin, princely crown on his head. The light reflected off the silver fae metal that had forged the crown. In the center was the black, oplyx stone of the dark fae realm. Located only in the clintick caves, workers only harvested a few of the rare stones from those deep bowels.
Looking at Brokk’s crown reminded Cole he had a slightly larger crown perched on his head. He didn’t touch it because, if he did, he’d tear it off and throw it away. He was not in the mood for this shit.
Cole slipped from the shadows beside the dais and strode across it. Brokk walked beside him as they put themselves on full display of everyone in the grand ballroom. The candles’ flames danced in their golden sconces and cast shadows across the black walls.
The dark fae do have one friend… the shadows.
They thrived in the shadows.
For a few seconds, the room's noise remained at the same level, but as more and more guests spotted them, the noise declined until silence descended. Not even when the hush gave way to a raucous wave of applause that shook the chandeliers overhead did Cole look at them.
He gritted his teeth against the impulse to leap from the dais and punch them all. Beside him, he sensed Brokk’s growing irritation.
“How long do you think this will last?” Brokk murmured as they approached two of the three thrones set in the middle of the dais.
“Days,” Cole replied.
Brokk’s shoulders hunched up as he muttered, “I’d rather be back in the war.”
“So would I.”
Never had Cole wished to return to those battlefields, but at least he knew what to expect there. He had no idea what to expect from the immortals crammed into this room.
His father rose from the massive throne set in the center of the three. A smile lit his handsome face as he spread his arms. Increased applause followed, but apprehension flashed in his father’s eyes as he looked from him to Brokk and back again.
Cole smiled, but he was aware that while he and Brokk were making a good show of seeming perfectly fine to the room, they didn’t fool their father. Though they tried to hide it from him, the king of the dark fae knew his sons hadn’t returned from the war the same.
But then, the king wasn’t the same either. He couldn’t be after losing five of his sons.
Cole didn’t miss the increased sorrow in his father’s black eyes or that he sometimes locked himself away for hours during the day. He hadn’t done that since the years immediately following the death of Cole’s mother.
With the door to his private solar shut and locked, the king sat in solitude while he grieved his losses. Cole would like to do something to ease his father’s sadness, but he had no idea how to help him when some days he felt like he was drowning too.
Their side won the war, but they’d lost so much, and they’d failed to accomplish what they set out to do.
Still, Cole’s smile became more genuine as his eyes held his father’s. Unlike Brokk and Cole, the king was pure dark fae, and because of that, he possessed the black hair, eyes, and lithe build of all purebred, dark fae.
Cole saw little of himself in his father’s narrow face, hawkish nose, onyx eyes, and lean frame. His father also stood a good three inches shorter than Cole’s six-seven height.
However, there were similarities in their thick eyebrows, full lips, and steel wills. Like himself, his father’s ciphers ran from the tips of his fingers, up his arms, and across his shoulders.
When not wearing a shirt, it was possible to see the ciphers covering his shoulder blades as they traveled down his back before stopping at his waist. He had even more ciphers that he kept completely hidden from view.
The dark fae kept many of their ciphers hidden from others, but these visible ciphers were impossible for them to hide. Some things refused to be caged, and their visible ciphers were some of them.
The ground beneath Cole’s feet quaked as the immortal guests stomped their feet and clapped their hands. His father rested a hand on Cole’s shoulder before turning to Brokk.
“My sons, the heroes!” his father declared.
Cole hadn’t considered it possible, but the cacophony in the great hall increased. Bracing himself, he turned to face the immortal creatures.
They blurred together until he stared out at nothing more than a sea of faceless bodies scattered across a blood-strewn field.
Cole shoved the image aside and turned to sit on the throne to the right of his father. His throne was noticeably smaller than his father’s, and it lacked the black skulls perched above his father’s shoulders.
Feeling as if his bones might break, Cole gripped the curved, black ends of his throne until his knuckles turned white. Brokk walked stiffly in front of him and settled onto the chair to his father’s left.
At six hundred years old, Brokk was the middle of the king’s sons. Because of that, he’d never sat so close to his father’s side before, but now that they were the only two sons the king had left in the Gloaming, Brokk’s chair had been moved to sit next to their father’s.
Cole refused to think about what had become of his two remaining brothers. Like the rest of the losing rebels, they were stripped of everything and were now ruthlessly hunted.
No matter how many realms they ran through, it was only a matter of time before they caught Orin and Alvaro. Cole dreaded that day.
At one time, he and his brothers were as thick as thieves, and he’d always known where they were. Now, he knew five were dead and two were on the run.
If they didn’t somehow figure out a way to take down the Lord, the next time he saw Varo and Orin, they would most likely be dead or on their way to execution.
Despite having chosen different sides in the war, Cole was glad they’d survived, especially Alvaro. As half-dark and half-light fae, Varo had always been more sensitive than the rest of his brothers. He’d survived the war, but Cole knew Varo wouldn’t handle the aftermath of it well.
If he was having nightmares, then Varo must be a mess.
Lexi absently clapped along with all the immortals and tried to keep her mouth shut while she examined the exquisite ballroom and all the beautifully dressed immortals. She wasn’t used to seeing immortals dressed like this. In the human realm, they always wore human clothes to blend in.
Even now that the humans knew about their existence, most immortals still wore the clothing of the mortal’s. She didn’t know if it was from habit or because the immortals preferred to blend in.
She had noticed the dark fae stopped concealing the pointed tips of their ears in shadows, the pixies stopped hiding, the lycan sometimes transformed, and the vampires would transport in public, but for the most part, the immortals continued to blend in with the mortals while on Earth.
And they were about as far from Earth as it got in this place. The end of the line was so far outside of the room that she had to stand on tiptoe to see inside, but what she saw awed her.
The roof and walls of the dome-shaped room were black. Sconces holding torches of wavering flames hung on the walls. The shadows their glow cast swelled and danced as if they were a living entity—and in the Gloaming, they very well could be.
This was the dark fae land—the land of the immortals who were one with shadows. There could be dozens of dark fae standing in those shadows, and she wouldn’t see any of them.
She glanced uneasily around but didn’t see anyone. Then the stars illuminating the ceiling moved, and she forgot her unease as she went back to trying not to gawk.
Some of the stars were constellations from Earth; there was the Little and the Big Dipper and Orion, but others looked utterly unfamiliar. A rising purple moon was followed by a large, red planet that slid across the top of the dome.
As the familiar constellations shifted out of view, new stars rose to replace them. These were three times bigger and the color of a flamingo as they floated overhead.
She had no idea what realm they were from, but their beauty stole her breath. She could stand here and watch this ever-changing display for the rest of her life and probably still not see everything it offered.
Around her, the applause increased before abruptly ceasing. She kept her attention focused on the dome while she tried to ignore the oppressive heat of the bodies surrounding her. The main hall was gigantic, but the fae king must have invited every immortal who had supported the war as at least a thousand of them filled the room and spilled out the doorways.
She tugged at the collar of her dress as a bead of sweat slid down her neck. It was a beautiful gown, but she’d never worn anything like it before, and she found the copious amounts of material uncomfortable.
When the line started moving, she tore her attention away from the ceiling to follow the others. Beside her, Sahira practically danced as she shifted from foot to foot and twisted her hands before her.
“This is so exciting,” she murmured.
This is awful. But Lexi didn’t express her feelings; she imagined there were ears everywhere in this realm.
Finally, the crowd moved forward enough for them to enter the main part of the room. Her eyes instantly settled on the golden dais at the far end of the room and the three thrones there.
Strange carvings etched the gold dais; Lexi had no idea what those carvings represented, but she suspected they represented something to the dark fae. Ten steps led to the top of the dais, which meant the king and his sons looked down on the room from their lofty positions.
In the center of the stage, the dark fae king sat higher than his sons and surveyed the room with an air of casual indifference. The crown perched on his head was larger than the ones his sons wore and possessed three of the black stones, while his sons’ crowns only had one stone each.
The king’s pointed ears poked out from beneath his shoulder-length, black hair. He was handsome with his black eyes and high cheekbones, but the coldness surrounding him made her pull at her dress again as a clammy sensation crept over her skin.
She didn’t know how he could appear so indifferent to so many immortals, but it wouldn’t surprise her if he yawned. That nonchalance spoke of his power as much as the black ciphers covering the fingers resting on the curved ends of his throne.
Lexi gulped when she saw the two skulls behind his shoulders. The skulls were black, but she had the unsettling feeling eyes once filled the empty sockets.
To the king’s left sat a handsome, slender man with disheveled blond hair that almost covered the tips of his pointed ears. The blank expression on his face didn’t change as the Shadow Realms’ members climbed the dais to greet him and his family.
When she looked to the king’s right, she couldn’t keep her jaw from dropping.
She’d heard stories about the king’s eldest son. She didn’t think there was anyone who hadn’t heard about him, including the humans who now knew immortals existed.
His ruthlessness was legendary. His ability to kill was becoming mythological. The troubadours already sang about his feats on the battlefield. The few songs she’d heard in the marketplace told of his power, his size, and the way women fell at his feet.
Not only did the women swoon for him, but his enemies cowered, and there were rumors some had killed themselves rather than face his wrath.
Lexi was sure there was some truth to the songs and just as sure there were many exaggerations too. Looking at him now, she didn’t think any of it was an exaggeration.
Unlike most of the dark fae—who usually stuck to and bred with their kind—the king had spread out to other immortal species and produced nine children. His oldest son’s mother was a lycan, and it showed in the man.
His shoulders were broad, and the thick muscles bulging beneath his black tunic differentiated him from the lean builds of the dark fae. He looked like he could tear the head from a bull and bash his enemies to death with it.
Gold edged the sleeves, neckline, and hem of his formfitting black tunic. Beneath it, he wore a pair of black pants. The tunic and pants were the standard garments for the dark fae, but somehow, he made the clothing stand out in a room full of similar attire.
The vibrant, Persian blue color of his eyes was evident across the vast distance separating them. Those striking eyes also differentiated him from the purebred, dark fae as they all had black eyes. However, he did possess the dark fae’s jet-black hair and pointed ears.
Cut short, his hair emphasized his tanned skin and the angles of his cheekbones. His square jaw had a short, black beard lining it. He was one of the most handsome men she’d ever seen. And it was clear the troubadours weren’t lying about women falling at his feet as the ones who climbed the dais to greet him all preened and simpered while openly flirting with him.
She had no idea how they could flirt so brazenly with him when he stared at them as if he didn’t see them, but each new woman who went to greet him smiled as she fawned over him.
One brazen vampire rested her hand on his arm as she leaned forward. Lexi was sure her low-cut dress left nothing to the imagination.
To be fair, they also flirted with the king and younger son, but it wasn’t as overt with them. Or maybe she imagined it.
Uncomfortable with the display, she shifted her attention back to the stars but found her eyes irresistibly drawn back to him. As they got closer and the crowd between them eased, she saw that his ciphers ran down his thick forearms to the tips of his fingers.
The black markings resembled flames with their sharp edges but managed to flow like water as they encircled his wrists and hands. She supposed this mix of fire and water made sense as the dark fae could control the elements.
His short-sleeved tunic revealed more ciphers around his biceps before they disappeared beneath the material. They reemerged at the collar of his shirt. Cole’s beard hid them, but the way the flames moved up his neck made her suspect the tips of the ciphers licked at his chin.
Having that many ciphers was a clear sign of his power and it oozed from his pores while his steely gaze surveyed those who came before him with an air of disdain. Only the arrogant dark fae would throw this big of a party and seem annoyed by their guests.
As she and Sahira edged closer, Lexi found it increasingly difficult to breathe, and she tugged at the collar of her dress again. She didn’t belong here.
What she’d seen of the Gloaming was beautiful, but she was ready to go home, and she did not want to climb those steps to introduce herself to these powerful, cold men. She was uncomfortable with this entire show.
What am I doing here? Why did I agree to this?
She yearned to be at home and in bed with a book. She’d give anything to be anywhere other than here. Lexi glanced at the door three hundred feet away and tried to figure out if she could make it out of here before Sahira stopped her.
Escape wouldn’t be possible, at least not without drawing a lot of attention to herself. She gulped as she clasped her hands before her and squeezed them.
She’d probably never see any of these immortals again, but she couldn’t make a scene. Her father would be mortified if she did.
Still, she gazed longingly at the door as she resigned herself to her fate.
Deciding to get through it as fast as possible and hoping she didn’t make a fool of herself, she turned her attention back to the stage and bit back a gasp when she found the lethal prince of the dark fae staring straight at her.
Cole couldn’t tear his gaze away from the woman who looked about to bolt from the hall. Her deep auburn hair hung in waves around her shoulders and swayed against the middle of her back as she searched for what he assumed was an exit. The deep red strands of her hair shimmered in the starlight.
She tugged at the collar of the emerald dress hugging her slender body. It emphasized the rounded hips of her hourglass figure. Her full breasts were thrust high by the bodice, but she revealed far less cleavage than most other women in the room.
Despite that, when his gaze fell to her breasts, a bolt of desire hit him. She turned back toward the stage, and when her eyes met his, they widened. They stared at each other before she glanced back toward the doorway.
For a second, she looked about to bolt as she stepped away from the line, but then she closed her eyes and resumed her place. He’d never seen her in the Gloaming before; he would have remembered her.
His hands gripped the ends of his throne as the line snaked forward and the woman moved closer. When she bit her bottom lip, his gaze latched onto her lush mouth.
What does she taste like?
He vowed to discover the answer to that before this night was over.
Cole stalked her every move as she snaked through the throng and shifted from foot to foot while the other immortals crowded around her. She didn’t meet his gaze, but her eyes traveled toward him before darting away.
When a male vampire pressed entirely too close against her back and she cringed away from him, Cole almost rose from his seat to kill him. However, he couldn’t kill a guest for touching a woman.
Such a thing could set off another war, and he’d had enough blood and death. Although, he suspected more would come soon. The war was over, but another one had been brewing for years; he would find himself at the center of it again.
He didn’t know how much time passed, but finally the woman stood near the stairs. A male lycan climbed the four steps to the dais in front of her. After he was introduced, Cole nodded to the man, but he didn’t hear a word of what the lycan said.
The woman leaned forward and gave her name to their helot, Sindri. Sindri stepped away from her. “Milords, I present to you the ladies Elexiandra and Sahira Harper.”
Cole jolted when Sindri announced her last name. Harper!
Brokk’s head turned toward him, and Cole exchanged a look with his brother. He was sure his startled expression mirrored Brokk’s. Between them, their father didn’t react, but the king had to know she was here; he’d invited her after all.
Harper.
And now he understood the woman’s nervousness. She had never been to the Gloaming or any of the Shadow Realms before. Or at least that’s what her father told him during one of their countless conversations.
The world shifted and blurred, and for a minute, Cole found himself sitting in a tent across from a man with pale blond hair. Delano Harper’s bright blue eyes twinkled as he smiled and sipped his wine.
“They’ll never know what hit them, boys. I can assure you of that,” Del said as he finished his drink and gestured for the pretty serving girl to bring him more.
Brokk and Cole gazed at each other before returning their attention to the robust vampire sitting across from them. The wine had reddened Del’s cheeks, but his eyes remained clear.
Over the two years they fought together, Cole had learned nothing dulled Del’s intelligence. He often used his ability to drink more alcohol than three immortals combined as a way to make others think he was less aware of what was going on around him, while he was keenly aware of everything.
He’d fooled Cole a couple of times before he caught on to the act.
He learned Del was a brilliant master of deception, manipulation, and strategy. He’d also become one of Cole and Brokk’s best friends.
Del rarely talked about his daughter over the years, but on the rare occasions when there were no battles to fight, strategies to plan, or enemies closing in on them, he would sometimes speak about her. There was no denying the love in the man’s voice, and it was difficult to shut him up once he got started.
Cole had always found this amusing while he listened to the doting father prattle on about his daughter. He’d claimed she was beautiful, but Cole had blown it off. There were many beautiful immortals, and a father was always biased, but Del hadn’t exaggerated.
Over the years, he’d spent many hours with Del, they’d saved each other more times than Cole could count, and then, one day, unable to get to him in time, he watched helplessly as his friend died.
And now he was about to come face-to-face with his daughter.
Lexi tried not to bury her hands in the abundant material of her dress as she sought to control the tremble in them. She could do this, and she would do it without falling flat on her face.
The king first. Make sure you approach the king first.
She kept reminding herself of this because she was desperate to rush through this and get out of here. If she didn’t approach the king first, it would be considered an insult, and the dark fae did not like to be insulted.
As the lycan ahead of them left the dais, she threw her shoulders back, lifted her chin, and strode up the steps with a confidence she didn’t feel. At her side, Sahira sauntered forward with elegant grace.
When they stopped before the king, Lexi curtsied. Having never done it before in public, she half feared she’d faceplant, but somehow she managed not to fall over.
“Your Highness,” she murmured.
“Milady,” the king replied with a bow of his head.
Lexi gulped as the power emanating from him rippled across her skin. The number of ciphers he possessed had hinted at his power, but this close, she could tell he was keeping a lot of it hidden and doing a damn good job too.
Lexi forced a smile and somehow managed to keep her hands from shaking as she turned away from him. She approached the younger of the two brothers as Sahira went to the older. Brokk’s aqua blue eyes were warm as he studied her.
“Milady,” he said and clasped her hand. “It’s a pleasure to meet you.”
Lexi had no idea what to make of those words and the gesture; she hadn’t seen him touch anyone else, so she merely smiled. “You also, Your Highness.”
The prince looked about to say more, but a man and his daughter were already being introduced. They were heading up the steps and toward the king as Sahira approached her. If she didn’t move now, she wouldn’t get the chance to speak with the older brother.
She’d prefer not to talk with the intimidating man, but it would be rude if she left the stage, and one did not snub the dark fae. They especially didn’t snub the eldest son of the king.
Knowing their time was over, Lexi gave a subtle tug on her hand in the hopes the prince would release her. It took a couple of seconds before he seemed to recall he was holding her hand.
With a small smile, he released her. Lexi’s gaze lingered on him, not because she was still confused by his strange behavior but because she had to brace herself before walking over to the older brother.
She had to go now.
Walking away from the brother, she crossed before the king as the father and daughter stepped onto the dais. Acutely aware of all the eyes on her, she tried not to blush, but she couldn’t control the riotous beat of her heart.
When she finally lifted her head to take in the prince, she wasn’t surprised to find his striking, Persian blue eyes locked on her. She’d felt them burning into her flesh since the second she stepped onto the dais.
She’d never seen a blue so pure or vivid before. They were like looking into a pool of crystalline ocean water on the clearest of days. If she wasn’t careful, she could get lost in those eyes.
Her heart lodged in her throat as she stopped before him. Unable to keep the tremor from her hands, she twisted them into the folds of her dress and clutched them until her bones ached.
His leisurely perusal of her body caused her knees to quake. She was used to men examining her, but she’d never experienced it with this kind of intensity before, and she’d never been this unnerved or excited by it.
Cole couldn’t tear his gaze away from the beautiful woman standing before him. Elexiandra, he recalled Sindri saying.
Del had told him his daughter’s name, but it was lost to him until Sindri announced it. He would not forget it again.
Up close, she was even more beautiful beneath the radiance of the turning sky. This close, he could tell shards of pure emerald flecked her hunter green eyes.
With her high cheekbones and rosebud lips, she stood out in a room full of immortals. The smattering of freckles dotting the bridge of her slender nose and sun-kissed skin gave her beauty a charming air of innocence.
Looking at her, something inside him shifted, and for the first time in his life, the lycan part of him exerted dominance over the dark fae. And the lycan wanted her.
He’d always identified more with his dark fae side and found it more powerful than the wolf, but now the beast was making its presence known as fangs he always kept suppressed throbbed and lengthened.
She’d attracted the attention of more than a few men in the room, and Cole had to keep his mouth shut as he restrained himself from bearing his fangs at them. His claws lengthened until they bit into his throne.
Wood splintered beneath his grip and buried itself deep within his skin. Still, the pain did nothing to ease the turmoil churning through him. His teeth scraped together until he was certain everyone in the room could hear them grinding back and forth.
He didn’t know what it was about this woman, but for the first time in his life, he was on the verge of losing control of his wolf. He was still staring at her when the woman she walked onto the dais with strolled over to her.
“Elexiandra,” the woman whispered, “we must go.”
Elexiandra nodded before speaking. “Milord.”
Her voice was as enchanting as her, and when she spoke, he spotted the tips of her fangs. Vampire, he recalled.
Half vampire, half human, he recalled Del once saying. Unlike full-blooded vampires, she could go out in the day, but she couldn’t teleport, and she wasn’t as strong as other immortals.
For some reason, that weakness caused his protective instincts to become more extreme. He tore his attention away from her to glare at the crowd of men openly admiring her. They all looked away from him.
“Milady,” he greeted.
Before he could say more, the father and his daughter stepped closer and edged Elexiandra and the other woman away. He opened his mouth to stop them, but the father was speaking, and they were gliding down the stairs.
He watched until they vanished into the crowd.
All Lexi wanted was to flee this place. There were far too many immortals here, they were far too comfortable with each other, and she felt like a fish out of water as everyone else celebrated. However, if she left now, they would notice.
Or would they?
She was one of thousands here tonight; surely they wouldn’t notice if she and Sahira slipped away before the party ended. Sahira could stay; she was enjoying herself.
Lexi smiled as she watched Sahira being twirled around the dance floor by a handsome dark fae. The flutes' haunting strains and the dark fae’s musical instrument, the ocraba, filled the room.
Now that the introductions were over, the night had given way to music and dancing. The black floor, which reflected the stars above, was filled with immortals imbibing in drinks and food. Their laughter filled the air while their bodies warmed the room.
She had a feeling Sahira wouldn’t be returning to the room they were sharing with other immortal women until much later tonight, if at all. Which meant, even Sahira might not notice if she slipped away to return home.
She knew how to get back to the portal leading to the human realm. It was probably guarded, but she didn’t think they would deny her if she said she was returning home. They probably wouldn’t tell the king either. Who cared if someone left before it was all over?
And since her father was gone, she was the one responsible for protecting and watching over their property.
Maybe she could get permission from the king or one of the princes to return early. As soon as the idea popped into her head, she shut it down. The idea of talking to any of those men made her shiver in apprehension. The power radiating from them was more than she’d ever encountered before, and she wasn’t eager to experience it again.
Unfortunately, she didn’t think she could avoid it. She was in their world, after all, in their home, and at their party.
But did that mean she had to stay here?
Yes, it did. Because it would be rude if she left early, but she could always slip away to her room. At least it was quieter there, and the night would pass faster if she slept. In the morning, she could leave. If she stayed until then, it wouldn’t be seen as rude… she hoped.
Lowering her head into her hands, she rubbed at her temples as she tried to figure out what to do. But the more she pondered her options, the more her head pounded.
“Lexi,” a voice purred from beside her.
Her eyes closed, and she bit back an inner groan as she tried not to cringe away from the voice. Could this night get any worse?
She had no idea why Malakai Calsov insisted on using her nickname when they barely knew each other, but he’d done so ever since she was a child. Having grown up on neighboring properties, she’d seen Malakai a few times a year.
However, since he was more than two hundred years older than her, they never played together, barely spoke, and the way he looked at her had always scared her a little.
He stared at her like he knew her, no… not knew her. Once she became a teenager, he started staring at her like he wanted to devour her.
The last time she saw him, her father, his father, and Malakai were on a brief visit home from the war. She’d come downstairs to discover them sitting at the dining room table.
She’d ignored Malakai’s ravenous stare as she walked over to rest her hand on her father’s shoulder. She’d leaned forward to get a look at what they were studying, but her father shoved the papers away before turning to smile at her.
“My beautiful daughter.” He took her hand and clasped it in his. “I won’t bore you with such trivial things as war.”
“It’s not trivial,” she replied. “I’m interested in what you’re doing.”
He squeezed her hand. “Maybe some other time. Could you please see if Sahira can bring us some blood?”
She knew he was trying to get rid of her, so she didn’t argue with him. Her father preferred to keep the atrocities of war hidden from her. Besides, she disliked being in the same room as Malakai.
She felt his eyes boring into her back as she walked away and decided to avoid him while he was home. Unfortunately, that only lasted an hour.
She was in the stables when he found her and backed her into a corner. With his hands on either side of her head, he lowered his face, so they were eye level with each other.
His disheveled, dark brown hair hung around his handsome face, and his brown eyes burned with an intensity she’d never seen before. It made her skin crawl as she searched for some way to bolt, but she wasn’t getting past him.
“Hello, Lexi,” he greeted.
“Malakai.”
“How have you been?”
She swallowed to wet her suddenly parched throat and forced herself to smile at him. “I’ve been fine, and you?”
“I’ve been fighting a war.”
Unlike the look of horror, wisdom, and age that shone in her father’s eyes when he spoke of the war, the look in Malakai’s eyes was one of almost twisted, perverse pleasure. Her stomach churned as she realized he enjoyed the fighting, the death, and the brutality of this unnecessary war.
She could never express how his enjoyment of the war made her feel sick. It was treasonous, and he would use it against her. She was supposed to be for the war; she was supposed to want the humans to know about them so immortals could walk the earth freely and stop hiding in the shadows.
But it never bothered her that she had to keep her true nature hidden from the humans. She much preferred hiding to watching the slaughter of countless mortals and immortals every day.
“We are going to win this war,” he stated.
“I’m sure you are,” she said and glanced over his shoulder again. “If you’ll excuse me, I have some things I have to do.”
When he didn’t move to let her pass, she tried dodging underneath one of his arms. He laughed and lowered his hand to her hip to keep her in place. Lexi buried the anger surging through her at the intimate gesture.
He wanted to rattle her, and she refused to give him the satisfaction of seeing it happen. But she had no idea how to get out of this.
Lifting her chin, she was about to ask him to move his hand when he said something that stole the words from her. “I intend to marry you, Elexiandra.”
She couldn’t keep her jaw from falling at the statement; she also couldn’t stop a nervous chuckle.
“You find that funny?” he asked.
Not funny, more astonishing, but the malice in his eyes caused her chuckle to stop abruptly. “No, I don’t find it funny at all.”
She’d never spoken truer words in her entire life.
“We come from good families, our properties adjoin each other, and you will give me fine children,” he said.
Lexi could only stand and stare at him. She had no intention of marrying him. Of course, she didn’t say that to him, but he would soon learn it didn’t matter what he wanted. He couldn’t make her marry him; her father would never allow it.
Lexi grimaced as she replied, “I’m not marrying you or anyone else.”
He smiled as his gaze raked her. Despite keeping her shoulders back, her spine straight, and her chin raised, she had to resist covering herself with her hands. She wore a black sweater and jeans, but she’d never felt more exposed in her life.
“Malakai, where are you?” his father’s voice, drifting through the barn door, didn’t make Malakai move away.
“I’m coming back from this war, Elexiandra,” he told her. “And when I do, I expect to claim all the rewards the Lord of the Shadow Realms promised us for winning. You will be one of the first things I claim.”
“I am not a spoil of war.”
She was not one to push back or fight against others, and she had no idea where those words came from or how she found the strength to utter them, but she refused to be something he claimed.
If she did marry, it wouldn’t be to a man who believed he could own her. It would be to someone who treated her as an equal, and that would never be Malakai.
He smiled as he lowered his hand to run a finger down her cheek. Lexi compelled herself not to recoil from his touch; she would not give him the satisfaction.
“But you will be mine,” he murmured.
“Malakai!” his father called from outside.
He lowered his finger from her cheek, and before she could stop him, he kissed her forehead. Lexi was too stunned to respond, and by the time she formed a response, he was striding down the shedrow. His swagger caused her teeth to clench.
Now that she could see beyond him, she spotted her father and Malakai’s stepping into the barn. His father’s irritation was evident on his face, but she couldn’t quite make out his clipped words. When they disappeared, her father walked toward her.
The light filtering through the windows and the doorway at the end illuminated his broad shoulders and solid frame. Stubble lined his jaw, and dark circles shadowed his eyes, but they were still sharp as they narrowed on her.
“What did he say to you?” her father demanded.
“He said the Lord of the Shadow Realms has promised to reward the fighters, and he intends for me to be one of those rewards. He wants to marry me.”
Her father snorted as he ran a hand through his pale blond hair. “Well, since he ranks far lower than me, you won’t have to worry about that. It’s not something I’ll ever let happen.”
Her shoulders sagged, and she smiled as she linked her arm through his. “So, you don’t plan to give me away anytime soon?” she teased.
The smile slid from his face as he patted her hand. “I never want to give you away, and I’m certainly not going to give you to someone you don’t choose.”
His words had assured her. He was her protector; he was stronger and held more power than Malakai. She never had to fear being forced into marriage.
But that was months ago. Now her father wasn’t here to protect her, Malakai’s father was dead too, and she was standing beside Malakai, who had that awful, leering grin on his face. It was the grin that said he could see straight through her clothes, the one that said he’d come to claim his reward.
Cole watched Elexiandra as she stood beside Malakai. Her delicate chin jutted out, and fire shown in her eyes as she kept her hands clasped firmly before her. He couldn’t hear what Malakai said to her, but he could tell she didn’t like it.
Malakai held his hand out to her, and she stared at it before glancing around the dance floor. Cole sensed her panic as she stared at the couples with desperation in her eyes.
He stepped forward to intervene, but Brokk blocked his way. Cole shot his brother a withering look that caused Brokk’s eyebrows to rise. “What’s gotten into you, killer?”
Cole watched as Elexiandra’s shoulders slumped, and she slid her hand into Malakai’s. The vamp grinned as he led her onto the floor. When he went to grasp her other hand, she jerked it back, but Malakai grabbed it and placed it against his chest.
Cole’s teeth ground together; Malakai fought in Cole’s army, but he’d never liked the arrogant vamp who took far too much joy in tormenting and killing others. It was what they all had to do to survive the war, but Malakai was one of those immortals who smiled the entire time they slaughtered others.
Malakai was dark and twisted, and Cole disliked him anywhere near Elexiandra. Resisting the inexplicable urge to go out there and beat Malakai into a bloody pulp, Cole focused on Brokk.
“What is it?” Cole asked.
Brokk continued to stare questionably at him as he took a step back. “How are you enjoying the party?”
“As much as you.”
Brokk smiled grimly. “Then you’re having the time of your life.”
Cole chuckled. “Absolutely.”
Brokk clasped his shoulder and squeezed it. Neither of them wanted this, their father knew that, and if it had been up to Cole, this party never would have happened, but it wasn’t up to him.
If they were going to keep up the pretense of being on the Lord’s side and being thrilled about their victory in the war, then a celebratory ball was a necessity. And they were all going to have to grin and bear it.
“Enjoy, brother,” Brokk murmured before slipping into the crowd.
As he walked, some of the women reached out for him, and Brokk stopped to speak with them before moving on. Cole turned his attention back to the dance floor as the musicians continued to weave their magic upon the crowd.
He spotted Elexiandra amid the crush of bodies. Whereas everyone else was smiling while they danced with their partners, she remained rigid, and the look on her face said she’d rather be anywhere but here.
He was shocked to find himself wanting to intervene, but he had no idea why. What did he care if she was uncomfortable? He’d never considered the feelings of anyone outside of his family before. And as a dark fae, he’d only ever had two uses for women… fucking and feeding.
Yet when Elexiandra’s gaze darted to the doorway, something inside him stirred at her unease, and he realized it was the lycan making its presence known again. He contemplated this strange development as Malakai grasped the hand Elexiandra had rested on his shoulder and spun her around.
Whereas most women laughed when their partners did such a thing, Elexiandra glanced anxiously around when he pulled her close again. Malakai said something to her, and when she shook her head, he gripped her chin and lifted her head, so she had to look at him.
She tried to jerk her chin free, but Malakai refused to release her. And then she winced.
Before Cole had considered intervening, he found himself striding through the dancers toward them. The action surprised him, but not enough to make him stop shoving his way through the crowd.
Out of the corner of his eye, he saw immortals turning toward him and the smiles on some of the women’s faces, but he didn’t acknowledge them. He didn’t give a shit if they considered him rude; he couldn’t stop. He had to get to her.
In the corner, the bow fell away from the cello, and the flute fell silent. Elexiandra said something and tried to turn her face away, but Malakai kept hold of her chin. They were still fifty feet away from him, and he was about to start ruthlessly shoving his guests out of the way when the woman who walked onto the dais with her appeared at her side.
Sahira, he recalled Sindri announcing the woman’s name, and then another memory tugged at the edges of his mind. He recalled Del talking about someone named Sahira. It took him a couple of seconds before he remembered the woman was his half sister.
She was half witch and half vampire, which had to be the rarest combination of immortals in all the realms. He wasn’t sure how such a thing happened, given how much the witches despised the vampires.
Cole couldn’t hear the words they exchanged before Malakai released Elexiandra. She took a few steps back before turning and vanishing into the crowd with Sahira.
A gasp caught in Lexi’s throat when she stepped out of the hallway and into a room made of glass on all four sides. For a minute, she couldn’t breathe as her head fell back to take in the glass ceiling almost fifty feet over her head.
The gold beams running across the ceiling held the glass in place. In each corner of the room was a gold tree trunk and, carved to look like tree branches, the beams stretched overhead.
Hundreds of brown vines with hand-sized, green leaves covered at least half of the glass walls, but none of the vines touched the ceiling. They left it open to the two moons beyond the glass.
Flowers the size of her head clung to those vines. Their multicolored blooms lifted their petals to the moonlight spilling through the glass ceiling. They basked in the rays shining down on them.
She’d never seen flowers with colors like the ones in here. There were reds in shades she couldn’t begin to describe, pinks that weren’t quite pink and might be some color she’d never heard of, and yellows and oranges so vibrant they rivaled the sun. With their large petals and stigma in the middle, they reminded her of hibiscus, except they were larger and more luminous.
She doubted she was supposed to be here, but she couldn’t get her feet to turn away. This was the best thing she’d seen all night, and she wasn’t ready to leave it.
She had no idea where she was in the castle or what this room was. She’d told Sahira she was returning to the room assigned to them, but she must have gotten turned around somewhere.
Her aunt wanted to come with her, but Lexi insisted she stay and have a good time. It was so rare Sahira ever got to do anything like this, and unlike Lexi, she was enjoying herself.
Lexi glanced behind her; she could still hear the music, but she didn’t see anyone. She should go, but she didn’t move. Drawn to the flowers and excited to get a closer look at them, she descended the two steps into the room and strolled across the white, marble floor.
This was so wrong and might get her into a ton of trouble, but she felt like Sleeping Beauty being lured to the spindle as she crept further into the room.
It did not go well for Sleeping Beauty, she reminded herself. However, she didn’t stop.
She couldn’t decide what to look at first, the spectacular flowers or the bright, full moons. Stopping in the middle of the room, she tipped her head back as she stood beneath one of the moons. Her skin prickled from the energy they exuded.
She closed her eyes and breathed in the sweet aroma filling the room.
Cole stood cloaked in the shadows of the moon room as he watched Elexiandra descend the stairs. The awe on her face captivated him as her mouth parted. His father would be irate if he found her here; this room was built for his mother and remained a shrine to her.
It was once a place for her to retreat to when she needed to think and rejuvenate. His father spent weeks having it constructed and made sure the room's design made it so a piece of a moon could always be seen from somewhere, no matter what time of day or night it was.
At noon, that piece of moon was found in the far-right corner if he stood with his toes against the glass, but it was there.
This room was his mother’s retreat and her small piece of the lycan realm in the land of the dark fae. She’d brought the luna flowers in when they were no more than seeds and grown them until her death.
Cole barely recalled a time when the vines were no more than a foot tall. She died before she ever got to see them grow into something more, but he imagined this was what she’d envisioned for the room.
When he was a child and she was still alive, he’d sit on the bench in the far corner of the room and watch as she cupped each small vine in her hands. While she talked to them, they weaved around her, and some stroked her cheek.
Sometimes, he swore they laughed with her. And on the day she died, they wept with him when he retreated here. He’d come here in the hopes they’d all been wrong and a rogue warlock hadn’t killed her.
He’d come here believing he would find her smiling amidst her flowers. He would run to her, and she would envelop him in her arms and dry his tears while she laughed over the silliness of the mistake.
She hadn’t been here, it hadn’t been a mistake, and he’d lain in this room for days while he grieved her. The servants tried to lure him away, but he remained where his mother’s essence still thrived in the plants that hugged him while he cried.
Three days later, his father came for him. Cole recalled watching his father’s strong hand slip past the vines that had closed protectively over him while he slept and wept. He recalled being drawn from the vines to discover his father’s black, bloodshot eyes staring at him.
Cole hadn’t seen the man since he delivered the news of his mother’s death. Afterward, he’d retreated to his private solar. Broken and crying, Cole locked himself away too.
He remembered being astonished to see his father. He hadn’t expected him to come for him, but as his dad lifted him from the ground, Cole wrapped his arms around his neck and cleaved to him as he started crying again.
His father carried him from the room, put him in a bath, and dressed him. He’d never forget the broken slump of his father’s shoulders as he cared for him. Stubble lined his father’s normally clean-shaven face, and his tears had swelled his eyes.
Cole was only seven when his mother died, but a part of him died with her. A larger part of his father followed her into the grave.
Afterward, his father spent years torturing the warlock before Cole’s uncle, Maverick, convinced him to kill the monster. When Cole was fifteen, he overheard Maverick telling his father he shouldn’t keep the warlock alive and in the same house as Cole.
Maverick was still livid over his sister’s murder, but he believed Tove was only extending Cole’s suffering by keeping her killer alive. His father must have agreed as the warlock was dead a few days later.
His vengeance did nothing to ease Tove’s sorrow. And no matter how many women followed his first and only wife, Cole knew his father never loved any of them like he had his mother.
And now, another beautiful woman stood in his mother’s room. And to Cole’s amazement, the flowers turned their heads away from the moons and toward her.
He was the only one the flowers reacted to, partly because of his mother and partly because of his lycan blood. Over the years, the peace he received from the flowers and his love for the moon were the most lycan things about him; they were probably the only lycan things about him… until he encountered her.
And now, he could feel the beast stirring within him while he watched her.
Was she also part lycan? Was that why the flowers responded to her too?
No, Del had said her mother was a human, and Del was very much a vampire. Or maybe he remembered it wrong? Maybe he only thought Del said his daughter was part human, and he’d said lycan.
Cole believed he would have remembered if she was part lycan, but they’d been fighting a war and there was often a lot of drink involved when Del opened up about his daughter, so Cole could be wrong.
Elexiandra sighed and lowered her head. The serenity on her face and the moonlight streaming over her caused his breath to catch. The flowers reacted to her because it was impossible not to; she was magnificent.
They didn’t respond to her in the same way they did to him, but they weren’t indifferent to her like they were to everyone else who entered this room… except him. The flowers’ interest in her intrigued him almost as much as she did.
Cole released the shadows cloaking him, and they slid back into their places along the wall. He stepped forward and waited for Elexiandra to realize he was here.
When she opened her eyes, she spotted him and gasped. Her hand flew to her throat, and a panicked look crossed her face. Smiling, he stepped further away from the shadows caressing him and strolled toward her.
He’d been there when she entered the room, but she’d never noticed as the shadows kept him hidden. After she left Malakai behind, Cole lost sight of her and assumed she retreated for the night. Needing some time to himself, he slipped away to what was once his mother’s place and was now his.
Her gaze returned to the doorway, but she had to know he’d stop her before she ever made it there.
“Are you part lycan?” he asked as he stopped a few feet away from her.
A small crease formed between her eyes. “No, my father was a vampire.”
“I’m aware. I knew your father.”
The confusion left her face as a spark bloomed in her exquisite green eyes. “You did?”
“Yes. He was an amazing strategist.”
“I didn’t know that,” she murmured and glanced at the door again. “He didn’t talk about the war much.”
Of course, he wouldn’t talk about the war with her. He recalled Del saying she was young, but even if she was a couple of centuries old, an air of innocence surrounded her, and Del would seek to protect that.
“I spent a lot of time with him,” Cole said. “We fought together often, and I considered him a friend.”
“Were you….” She paused to swallow as tears briefly glistened in her eyes. “Were you there when he died?”
“Yes.”
Her shoulders slumped a little before they went back again and she looked to the doorway. He sensed her urge to bolt as she folded her hands before her and shifted from foot to foot, but she didn’t try to leave.
“Was it…? Did he… did he suffer?” she whispered.
Cole recalled watching Del go down beneath the crush of bodies. He didn’t know if the man suffered or not, as that was the last time he saw him. By the time they were able to hunt for the bodies of their fallen, the sun was already up and Del was nothing more than ash, but he couldn’t tell her that.
“No,” he said.
A single tear slid free before she wiped it away. Tears had never moved him before, and he never felt sympathy for anyone outside his family, but he found himself wanting to comfort her.
Over the years, he’d probably caused hundreds of tears to fall in his lifetime, and not once had they swayed him to compassion. But he hated the sight of her tears.
“Good,” she said. “I should go.”
At the same time, he asked, “Was your mother a lycan?”
She frowned at him. “No.”
“Are you sure?”
“Yes. I never met my mother, but she was human.”
“I see,” he murmured as he glanced at the flowers still tilted toward her. “The luna flowers are from the lycan realm. I’ve only ever seen them respond to lycans, such as myself.”
He found himself entranced by her as she studied the flowers again.
“I didn’t know the lycans had flowers.”
“The luna flowers grow in their land. They only bloom when the rays of the moon are shining down on them.”
“Amazing,” she whispered.
“They’re reacting to you like you’re a lycan.”
When she laughed, the sound made him blink. He’d never heard a sound so clear and sweet before. It reminded him of the joy he experienced as a child when he’d run through the fields with his arms open and the full moon shining down on him.
It was a time before the death of his mother and centuries before the war. A time when he was still innocent too. It was a time so long ago that he’d forgotten about it… until now.
Elexiandra’s eyes twinkled when she looked at the flowers again, and her laughter trailed away.
“I hate to disappoint them, but I am a vampire,” she said.
As she spoke, he saw the tips of her small fangs again. They would extend when she fed, but no vampire could ever completely hide them like a lycan could.
“I can see that,” he murmured.
Her head bowed as a blush crept up her neck and spread across her cheeks. It was so endearing his fingers itched to brush the hair back from her face, but he kept himself restrained.
He didn’t know why; he’d always gone for and almost always gotten what he wanted. But though he longed to touch her, he simply stood and watched as she stretched a hand toward one of the flowers before pulling it back.
When Cole clasped one of the flowers, some of the vines slid down to brush his arms as he moved. The flower’s petals were as smooth as silk and just as soft as he ran his finger across it before bringing it toward her.
Her fingers inched toward the flower, and when they landed on it, a smile lit her face. In response to her touch, the petals closed around her hand. She jumped and started to pull away but kept it there instead.
“It tickles!” She laughed.
Cole was stunned to realize he was grinning while watching the interaction between her and the flower. Its petals moved over her hand before it released her. Cole carefully returned the plant; it lifted its petals to the moon before twisting toward her again.
“They’re amazing!” she breathed.
There was something far more amazing to him inside this room.
“This was my mother’s room,” he told her. “My father had it built for her so that no matter where she stood in it, she could see at least a piece of a moon.”
A wistful smile played across her full lips as she gazed around the room. “It’s beautiful. I’m sorry. I shouldn’t be here. I was trying to find the room I was assigned to and got lost.”
“That can happen in this place. Sometimes, it changes around you.”
“Really?”
When he grinned at her, Cole realized he couldn’t recall the last time he genuinely smiled at anyone, but she made it easy to do.
“No, but it’s something my father used to tell me when I was a child. I think he was teasing me because I always got lost in this place.”
Lexi couldn’t see the intimidating king of the dark fae teasing anyone, even his son, but she saw no reason for the prince to lie to her. Then again, she didn’t understand why he was talking to her.
Part of her remained tempted to bolt out of here, but he so entranced the other part of her that she found herself eager to learn more.
“Do you still get lost here?” she asked.
“On occasion,” he said with a rueful smile.
She didn’t know if he was telling her the truth or saying that so she wouldn’t feel bad, but either way, it made her laugh. “It is a rather large castle.”
“There are over a thousand rooms.”
Lexi’s mouth dropped; a thousand rooms! If that were true, then he wasn’t lying about still getting lost in this place.
“What can someone possibly do with a thousand rooms?” she blurted, and then her hand flew to her mouth and her blush deepened as she realized the question was rude.
He didn’t seem to find it such as he laughed. “I have no idea, and I certainly haven’t seen them all. I could spend the rest of my life exploring this place and never find all of them. Some are hidden. Some are lost rooms only entered by past kings and queens, and those same rulers sealed others away.”
His words intrigued her. She would love the chance to explore this place for a week in search of those hidden and lost rooms. It would be fascinating. “I would try to find them all.”
“Perhaps one day,” he murmured.
As he spoke, more vines moved to brush against him, and a few encompassed his biceps before slipping away again. He was oblivious to them, but Lexi’s amazement of the plants grew; not only were they lycan plants, but they craved the touch of a lycan.
Under the silvery glow of the moon, his eyes were impossibly bluer as they perused her. Unlike Malakai, whose lascivious gaze seemed to strip her bare, she didn’t squirm beneath the prince’s inquisitive stare.
He didn’t make her feel dirty or exposed before him; instead, she felt as if he was trying to understand her better, and she was becoming increasingly intrigued by him. For some reason, this terrified her more than Malakai’s obvious lust.
The dark fae were not known for their kindness or interest in others. They were known for their ruthlessness, power, and ability to turn once perfectly normal beings into mindless sex slaves.
It wasn’t something the dark fae did to all of their sexual partners, but they did it enough that cautionary tales about them abounded.
Despite the warnings to stay away, there were still those who got too close and eventually became one of the shadow kissed creatures seeking only sexual gratification.
She would not be one of them.
“So, Elexiandra, is this your first time in a Shadow Realm?” he asked.
“Lexi,” she replied.
“Excuse me?”
She edged a little further away. “Please call me Lexi. It’s what I go by.”
He smiled at her as he prowled a little closer. When he was this close, the heat of his body caressed her skin, and her fingers itched to trace his ciphers.
Lexi gulped and shuffled a few steps back. Getting involved with a dark fae was an excellent way to lose her mind.
“Lexi then,” he murmured.
“And you’re Colburn,” she said.
“Call me Cole.”
She tried to think of a response, but her mind and common sense had taken a vacation when she required them most.
“Have you ever been to a Shadow Realm?” he asked.
“No, and I admit, I find it fascinating as well as a little frightening.”
“I think that is most immortals’ reaction to the Gloaming.”
Turning, she gazed out the windows and focused on the lush forest outside the glass as she tried to calm her racing heart. “Is there a sun here, or is it always night?”
“There is a sun, and like on Earth, it rises and sets. However, there are always at least two moons visible at one time, and at midnight, all four are clearly seen for at least an hour. There are all kinds of creatures in this land. Some are like the human realm, and others… well, others would give you nightmares for a week.”
“Amazing,” she murmured.
She’d love to walk outside this castle and into those woods to explore the wonders they hid. She never heard him move, but his chest pressed against her back.
Lexi gulped as her skin tingled like little pulses of electricity were running through it, and her heart raced like a horse pulling a chariot. The hair on her nape rose as bumps broke out on her arms. If she turned, she could touch him and discover what he felt like.
Don’t be an idiot!
She tried to remind herself of all the deadly things the dark fae could do and how treacherous they were, but it wasn’t doing her any good. She yearned to touch him and ease her curiosity.
She couldn’t get any saliva into her suddenly parched mouth as the power he emanated crackled against her until she felt dizzy from it. Clasping her dress, she forced herself not to touch her forehead and swoon like some woman from the past who suddenly got the vapors.
“That”—he leaned over her shoulder and pointed to the moon on the right. When he spoke, his breath brushed her cheek—“is Orius, and that one”—he pointed to the moon on the left— “is Carpton. You can’t see them right now, but the other two moons are Dashius and Golen.”
Lexi found it increasingly difficult to breathe as his presence overwhelmed all her senses. He smelled of allspice and something else, something musky and powerful, something she couldn’t quite put her finger on, but it was alluring.
“They’re beautiful,” she managed to croak out.
Larger than the moons on Earth, they cast a lot of light upon the realm. And they were beautiful. One was full, while the other was a crescent sliver.
“Yes,” he said, and she felt his eyes on her.
Lexi gulped; she shouldn’t do it, but her head turned toward him, and their eyes met. They were so close, she could tell that no other colors marred the perfect Persian blue of his eyes.
She didn’t mean for it to happen, but her gaze fell to his lips. Sheltered her whole life, she hadn’t spent much time around boys or men.
She was aware her father protected her, probably too much, but she’d never argued with him about it. He always said she would have plenty of time for those things when she was older, but she would never be a child again. He was determined she enjoy her childhood for as long as possible.
She’d probably stayed sequestered for too many years, but though the war only lasted a couple of years, the tensions building up to it started years before then. When she might have normally spread her wings, she remained at home to run things while her father became more entrenched in the events unfolding.
And now she was standing with one of the most powerful and deadly creatures ever to walk the realms, and she longed to kiss him. When his gaze fell to her mouth, her breath caught.
Was he going to kiss her?
She should run as fast as she could from here. Getting entangled with the prince of the dark fae was the worst idea ever, and Lexi didn’t want to end up shadow kissed, but she couldn’t move away from him.
One kiss couldn’t hurt. It took far more than one tiny, curiosity-easing kiss to turn someone into a mindless sex slave. She didn’t know how much more, but since she planned to keep her clothes on, she wouldn’t have to worry about it.
He was leaning toward her, so close his breath warmed her lips, when a piercing scream shattered their solitude. The prince jerked away as more screams and shouts preceded a loud bang.
“Stay here!” he commanded and ran from the room.
Sahira! Lexi hesitated only a second before running after him.
Cole raced down the hallways as the shouts and screaming continued. Another bang shook the floor and rebounded off the walls a second before he burst into the ballroom. He scanned the room as he tried to ascertain what was happening.
And then he spotted a group of lycans, vampires, and dark fae fighting on the other side of the room. The musicians had stopped playing, and Brokk, along with some dark fae guards, were carving their way through the fighters and tossing them away.
When one of them punched his brother in the back of the head, Cole snarled as he sped across the room to help him. They hadn’t survived the war to be taken down by a bunch of assholes in their own home. He’d already lost too many of his brothers; he would not lose anymore.
Brokk turned toward his attacker as Cole seized the vamp by the shoulder and threw him away. Guests scattered out of the way as the vamp skidded across the floor before crashing into the wall.
Dark fae guards surrounded the vamp and hauled him to his feet. Brokk nodded his thanks to Cole, but he didn’t have a chance to speak before the growing brawl drew his attention.
Power thrummed through Cole as he drew on the air surrounding him and pulled it toward him. When a couple of vamps and a lycan lurched toward each other, he held his hands out, turned them over, and pushed them apart with his palms facing outward.
The air around him shuddered as he pushed it outward. The impact of the air shoved the fighters back. They hit separate walls with loud thuds. The air rippled as he held out his palms to keep the fighters pinned against the wall.
Brokk punched a warlock in the face before gripping the back of his head and slamming it onto his knee. Brokk kicked the fighter away and lunged over a witch to snatch a candle from the wall.
Lifting the flame to his mouth, Brokk blew on it. Instead of the fire going out, it surged into a rolling inferno that torched those closest to him.
Immortals screamed as they raced away from him or fell to the ground and rolled as they attempted to smother the flames consuming them. The scent of burnt clothes and flesh permeated the air. The fire wouldn’t kill them, but they’d hurt.
When a vampire lunged toward him, Cole released his hold on the prisoners and spun to face his attacker. Red eyes met his a second before Cole drove the heel of his palm up and into the vamp’s nose.
Blood erupted from the vamp’s shattered nose, and it howled as its hands flew to its face and it staggered back. Lifting his foot, Cole planted it in the vamp’s belly and shoved it away from him.
“What is going on here?” his father’s voice boomed throughout the vast hall. “Who dares to fight in my home?”
Footsteps echoed across the floor and rebounded off the ceiling as his father stalked toward them. Immortals scrambled to get out of the way, and more of the innocent guests fell back. Tove’s fury vibrated the air around him.
“Guards, seize every single one of the fighters,” Tove commanded. “They will all reside in my dungeon until I decide it’s time for them to go.”
“You can’t do that!” a vampire protested.
His father stepped so close to the vampire their noses almost touched. “Are you going to stop me? I helped fund the Lord’s war. I gave him my best fighters, including my sons, and if you open your mouth one more time, I will give you to his dragons.”
The vamp blanched but wisely shut his mouth.
“Take them away,” Tove commanded.
The guards captured the twenty-five or so fighters. The remaining guests didn’t speak as they led the prisoners away. Some of their gazes flicked from the blood on the floor to the king of the dark fae.
Cole didn’t have to look at his father to know he was infuriated; it continued to vibrate the air in the room. More of the guests edged away from the king. He was the most powerful being in this room, and everyone knew it.
“This party is over; everyone go home,” his father commanded. “Everyone is to be out of here in twenty minutes.”
With that, his father turned and stalked away. Cole glanced at Brokk, who stared after their father’s retreating back.
“That was a quick celebration,” Brokk said.
“There wasn’t much to celebrate,” Cole muttered.
And then he recalled Lexi. Turning, he pushed his way through the crowd as it funneled toward the exit. Breaking free of them, he jogged down the hall to the moon room, but she wasn’t there.
“Shit,” he hissed.
He ran back to the main hall, but half the revelers had already left, and more were on their way out. Still, he searched for her amongst those who remained, but she was already gone.
“I cannot believe they dared to fight in my hall,” his father growled as he paced his solar.
The airy room allowed plenty of room for his angry movements as he stalked to one end, turned on his heel, and stormed past the large table in the center of the room. He reached the window on the other side of the room and paused to look down on the courtyard a few hundred feet below.
Silver sconces hung on the walls, and the torches situated inside them cast shadows across the walls and floor. Tapestries decorated the walls. Most of them were landscapes of different areas of the Gloaming, but one was of his mother, and the others were of all the king’s sons.
Despite the fact half of his sons fought against their father in the war, he would never remove their tapestries from his solar. They’d stood against him, but he still loved them; he always would.
If push came to shove, the king would lay down his life for those sons. They were now hunted as traitors, but he would do what he could to make sure they survived. Brokk and Cole were under strict orders to save them if they could, but they didn’t require any such orders; neither wanted Orin or Varo to die.
Situated in the North Tower, the solar provided a spectacular view of the Gloaming. Cole didn’t have to look out the window to picture the fields full of crops rolling into hills. Though the dark fae mostly survived on the energy produced from sex, they also ate enough regular food to make crops necessary in the Gloaming.
During the summer, those crops would fill the fields, but now they were only half grown. Like Earth, the Shadow Realms had seasons, and the seasons in the Gloaming were similar to Earth’s.
It was June in the human realm and spring in the Gloaming, but they didn’t have winter here. They had a longer spring, summer, and fall. The leaves changed colors and fell in the Gloaming, but new ones sprang forth within weeks of the old ones falling.
Cole’s uncle, Maverick, watched Tove as he paced from his seat at the table. A golden goblet full of wine sat before him, but Maverick removed the silver flask from inside his jacket, unscrewed the cap, and took a gulp. His uncle was more of a whiskey than a wine guy.
Taller than Cole by about two inches, Maverick had difficulty getting his six-foot-nine frame to fit under the table and kept his legs sprawled out to the side. His dark brown hair waved around his broad face, and his chestnut eyes shone with amusement as he watched the king.
Maverick was the alpha of his pack, but he couldn’t stop some of his members from leaving to fight against the Lord during the war. But then, the lycans always enjoyed a fight.
His pack was not the only pack in the Lunar Realm. Others resided there, and before the war, they often argued with each other. They would battle over land, losing bits and pieces to enemy packs only to reclaim it again the next day or week.
Cole leaned against the wall as he sipped wine from his golden goblet and watched his father. It had been years since he’d seen Tove so enraged. Brokk glanced at Cole and raised an eyebrow. Cole shrugged and drank some more wine.
“What started the fight?” Brokk inquired.
“A vampire grabbed the ass of a lycan’s mate. Her mate punched the vamp in the face; someone hit a witch in the ensuing battle. It was a free-for-all after that,” Tove replied.
“You can’t blame a lycan for defending his mate,” Maverick said.
“Maybe not, but they’re all going to spend a week in my dungeons.”
“You cannot blame a lycan for defending his mate,” Maverick repeated.
Tove stopped his pacing and turned to face Maverick. The two men stared at each other.
“They are on our side,” Maverick said. “Some of them are part of my pack. They were wrong to fight in your hall. Let them stew in that knowledge for the night, but set them free afterward.”
A muscle twitched in Tove’s jaw as his teeth ground together. Cole didn’t say a word, but his uncle was right, and his father knew it.
“It might not be the best idea to make an enemy out of them,” Brokk said.
His father grumbled something and paced over to the table. He grasped the chair at the end, his chair, and gazed down the table at his sons and Maverick.
“I’ll set them free tomorrow,” he relented. “Except for the vampire. He’ll stay in there until I say he can leave, and I don’t care if that’s three centuries from now.”
“They can’t fault you for that,” Cole said.
“No one gives a shit about the vampire,” Maverick muttered.
His father released the chair and pulled it back to sit on it. He waved a hand at the two chairs beside him. “Join me,” he commanded his sons.
Cole stepped away from the wall and walked down to sit at his father’s right side while Brokk took the chair on his left. Maverick sat a couple of chairs down from Brokk.
They had originally planned to have a full coalition meeting with the other immortals seeking to end the Lord’s tyranny. However, there was no reason for those members to remain in the palace once Tove commanded everyone to leave.
Maverick was family; it wouldn’t look odd if he remained, but it would look strange if the others did.
“I spoke with Talon,” his father said.
The warlock was a powerful asset to the coalition, but he was also the most cautious.
“He’s determined that we find someone who can sit on the throne before we try to destroy the Lord,” Tove continued. “He believes it won’t do us any good if we remove the maniac but have no one to replace him.”
“The throne and the power are going to rot whoever we replace him with,” Brokk said. “Just like it has the current Lord.”
Cole still remembered what the current Lord was like before he sat on the throne. He’d been a good man, a warlock who was chosen by the other immortals to take the place of the Lord before him.
Cole clearly remembered Andreas as a smiling warlock with hazel eyes and a boisterous laugh that once rebounded off the walls of the downstairs’ hall. He was one of the few immortals everyone liked, and now the throne had corrupted his mind and turned him into a madman who had unleashed hell upon the unsuspecting mortals.
“And each race of immortal wants it to be one of their own,” Maverick said.
“I don’t know why everyone is so willing to claim the next lunatic as one of theirs,” Cole muttered.
The idea behind the coalition was a good one. A few of the strongest leaders from different realms belonged to it, but unfortunately, the idea was better than the execution. They often spent more time bickering with each other than they did undermining the Lord’s control.
His brothers had known what they planned and hoped to accomplish, but five of them grew impatient with the lack of progress and broke off to join the rebels. Only two of them remained.
Cole didn’t fear that they would rat out the members of the coalition if they were caught. They may have stood on opposing sides of the war and had differing opinions on handling things, but there had always been a lot of love between them.
None of them had the same mothers, but they all had each other, and their father loved them all equally. They would never betray each other.
They were supposed to have stopped him before the humans ever learned about the existence of immortals. Instead, while the war was still waging in the Shadow Realms, the Lord grew impatient with its lack of progress and turned his dragons loose on Earth.
The humans, not expecting the attack and having never seen anything like the creatures scorching their land before, were slow to respond. But it didn’t matter; the Lord had gathered enough intel that he sent the beasts to destroy the human’s military strongholds first.
No country was safe from the wrath of the dragons. By the time the humans responded, their military was devastated, and what remained of it was ineffective against the dragons.
The war had spilled out of the Shadow Realms by then, and though the coalition spent much of the war working in secret to depose the Lord, Cole realized they’d failed. Now, they were still trying to figure out a way to defeat him, but millions, if not billions, had lost their lives in the process, including countless immortals.
Once the human realm fell, those immortals who fought on the rebel side had nothing left to fight for… other than their lives.
The war continued for almost another year, but it grew smaller and smaller until the rebels turned and fled in the hopes of saving their lives.
“Because they think they might have some sway of the next Lord if it is one of theirs,” Maverick said.
“Why? The warlocks have no control over this one,” Cole said.
“It makes no sense, but that’s the way it is,” his father said.
“Hmm….” Cole drummed his fingers on the table and glanced at the empty seat across from Maverick. At one time, Del would have occupied that chair, but his friend was gone.
However, his daughter was still very much alive. Cole pushed aside the image of Lexi’s awed face as she gazed at the luna flowers. Now was not the time.
“How do we go about finding someone to take the Lord’s place?” Brokk asked.
“That’s the question no one can answer,” Maverick said. “That throne was built for an arach. Those dragons belong to them.”
“But they’re all dead,” Cole said.
“That they are,” his father muttered as he poured himself a goblet of wine.
“There has to be someone who can handle its power,” Brokk said.
“We haven’t found anyone in a thousand years,” their father replied.
“There has to be something we can do,” Brokk insisted. “We can’t sit here and wait for the Lord to decide he wants all our realms, and all of us, dead next.”
“Someone has to sit on that throne,” Maverick said. “The Shadow Realms will be almost as unstable with an empty throne as it is with the Lord on it. The dragons will have free reign of the realms if someone isn’t on that throne to control them. And if those things decide to fly free….”
“We’re all fucked,” Cole finished when his voice trailed off.
“Exactly.”
“What if we kill the Lord and instead of replacing him with one immortal, we have a rotating group of them, each chosen by a member of the coalition?” Brokk suggested. “We can pick who we think will be the best choices for the throne.”
“And what if one of them sits on it and decides not to give up the throne’s power?” his father asked.
“We’ll fight that battle if we come to it, but if they’re not on it for very long, maybe we can keep the throne from corrupting them.”
“I think Brokk’s suggestion might be worth discussing with the others. Have you spoken with Circe?” Cole asked.
Circe was the witch on the coalition. No other witches knew one of their most powerful coven leaders was secretly helping other immortals bring down the Lord. They would have been astounded to learn that at one time she was also working with a vampire, but Del’s death ended that relationship.
Tove had originally gathered Maverick, Circe, and Talon for this. After years of friendship, he felt he could trust them, and he wanted the powers other immortal creatures could bring to the table.
He later brought in his sons, and Cole was the one who introduced Del. The man was a military genius, but not even Del could figure out a way to get through the dragons to destroy the Lord. He’d been working on something he said might change things. Unfortunately, he died before anyone could learn what it was.
“Brokk’s suggestion could work,” Maverick said.
“There’s a lot of hate between the different species; look at what happened here tonight,” his father said.
“There will be a lot more death if they don’t get over it,” Cole said.
His father sat back in his chair and clasped his hands before him as he stared at the far wall. “I think we might be on to something here. I think the others will approve of each species having equal time on the throne, and we can hold each other accountable.”
“It’s going to require a lot of trust between the species,” Maverick said.
“That’s something we’ve never had before,” Cole said.
“The humans never possessed knowledge of us either, and we never believed our families would be torn apart the way they are.”
“This may be our only hope,” Brokk said.
“I’ll talk with Circe and Talon,” his father said.
“If they agree, we’re still left with the biggest problem of all,” Brokk said.
“How do we get past the dragons to kill the Lord?” Cole asked.
They all stared at each other, but no one had an answer.
“Keep an eye out for Varo and Orin,” his father said. “Don’t put yourselves at risk, but if there’s something you can do….”
“We’ll save them if we can,” Cole vowed, and Brokk nodded.
Cole knew that was easier said than done as the Lord’s men were relentlessly hunting his brothers, but he would do what he could to save them.
Lexi strolled toward the large weeping willow near the lake. She inhaled the sweet scent of spring and the water lilies floating on the water. The gentle breeze caused the small green leaves to dance as she approached the thick canopy they created.
The branches spilling into the water sent small ripples across the serene surface when the wind stirred them. She couldn’t see it yet, but beneath the boughs of the tree and against its trunk, she’d erected a small marker for her father.
His body would never reside here, but his memories lingered like ghosts over a graveyard. She heard his laughter as he chased her beneath the drooping branches and through the curtain of tiny leaves.
Her laughter mingled with his when he lifted her from the ground and spun her around. Her feet flew through the air, and for a moment, she was flying and the world was this wondrous place. She never once doubted his love for her.
Over the years, they spent many hours beneath this tree playing, imagining they were in a fantasy world battling pirates or soaring through the air on the Lord’s dragons. Sometimes, she would sit on his lap while he read to her for hours, or they would feed the ducks while birds flitted through the branches and the wind whispered through the leaves.
It had been years since they last sat beneath the tree together. The war took him away long before it claimed his life, but she came here often to sit beneath the boughs and talk to him. Only now, he wasn’t talking back anymore.
She refused to look at the smoke rising from the burned-out city while she walked; she’d seen enough of it. Arriving at the tree, she pulled back some of the branches and ducked beneath the leaves.
When she released the branches, they swished as they settled into place behind her. Hidden beneath the tree, some of the weight lifted from her shoulders and they sagged.
She’d spent most of the day trying not to think about what the future held after their return from the Gloaming last night. She hoped it wasn’t true, but she suspected it wouldn’t be long before Malakai turned up here.
She didn’t know how much time she had, but she had to prepare. However, she had no idea what to do. No matter what happened, she would not join her life to his, but her refusal was not something he would take well.
What would he do to her? To the manor? To Sahira?
She shuddered at the possibilities before shoving them aside. Those were concerns for a later time. Now, it was just her, this secret place, and the small plaque for her father.
The willow’s branches encased her, but they provided enough room for her to walk over to the marker without bending. Kneeling before it, she wiped away the leaves that had fallen onto it and sat back on her heels to read it.
Delano Harper.
Beloved father, brother, and friend.
She’d wanted to put so much more onto it, but no stone could ever be big enough to display the depth of her love or the endless magnitude of her grief.
“I miss you, Daddy,” she whispered.
A low groan accompanied her words. Lexi froze as the hair on her nape rose and prickles raced across her skin. She held her breath as she waited for something more, but the only sound was the breeze rustling the leaves.
She glanced around the shadowed interior but didn’t see anyone else. Rising, she edged to the left of the tree trunk. Her hand went to the hunting knife strapped to the belt on her waist.
Because she was half human, she couldn’t transport away from a threat like other vampires. She didn’t burn or catch fire in the sun, though, so she supposed it was a good trade-off, even if it didn’t feel like one right now.
She hadn’t imagined that groan, and if there was a threat on the other side of the tree, she couldn’t fend off many immortals if they got their hands on her. Still, she had to know what was there.
She slid her knife from its holster and held it before her as she stepped around the tree trunk. Lexi’s hand flew to her mouth when she spotted the man on the other side of the tree.
Red covered him, and it took her a minute to realize it wasn’t because his clothes were red. No, torn open and blood-soaked were the best ways to describe what lay before her.
Unsure what to do, she stood and gawked for longer than she should have before reacting. When her feet stopped sticking to the soft earth, she rushed forward to kneel at his side.
She reached for him before jerking her hands back. She had no idea what to do or where to touch him that wouldn’t hurt him more. When he groaned again, his head rolled toward her, and a pair of narrowed black eyes met hers.
There was no recognition in those eyes, and she had no idea who he was, but she knew the raven hair, dark eyes, slender build, pointed ears, and ciphers of the dark fae. She had no idea what he was doing here, but whatever propelled him to seek shelter couldn’t be good.
“They’re coming for me,” he croaked.
“Who’s coming for you?” she asked.
She inspected the jagged slices filleting his side and chest to the bones beneath. The blood drenching his torn-open black shirt caused it to stick to his flesh.
Carefully peeling away the scraps of cloth, she revealed the jagged tears beneath. A lycan had done this.
Lexi suppressed the unease churning in her stomach while she inspected the wound. The Lord of the Shadow Realms had unleashed bounty hunters on the remaining rebel army, and with their superior tracking skills, many of those hunters were lycan.
She should get away from this man and flee to her house. She should pretend she’d never seen him or, better yet, turn him in. He was a danger to her and Sahira, but she didn’t move.
She’d never forgive herself if she turned her back on him or, worse, was the reason his hunters finished what they started. Her father had fought against him, but she didn’t want to fight, and she was so tired of all the violence and death.
“How many of them are coming?” she asked.
When he didn’t respond, she shifted her attention from his injury to his pale face. Even his lips had lost all their color, and his eyes were closed. Leaning closer, she listened to his shallow breaths as they rattled in and out.
He was alive, and if she could get him somewhere safe, he would heal, but if she did that, she’d embroil herself in this mess. She could get Sahira; her aunt would know what to do, but she preferred not to involve Sahira in this.
No matter what, she couldn’t leave him here to be hunted down and slaughtered. Rising, she made her way to the branches and pulled a couple back to peer out. Birds flitted through the limbs of a nearby maple, and a dog lounged in the sun by the barn, but she didn’t see anyone else.
If she could get him into the storm cellar and the tunnels running beneath the property, he could hide there until he healed.
It might be the worst decision she ever made, she already had enough to deal with, but she lowered the branches back into place and returned to the man’s side. He didn’t move.
He was completely helpless, and if she didn’t act soon, he would also be completely dead.
Grasping his arm, she draped it around her shoulder and slid her arm around his back. Planting her feet, she lifted him from the ground. He moaned, and his head fell back, but when she jostled him, it fell forward until his chin rested against his chest.
She may be half human, but at least she had some immortal strength, and she dragged him toward the edge of the tree with relative ease. With a shaking hand, she pushed aside the leaves to peer out again.
Across the field of green grass, the manor stood a couple of hundred yards away. Modeled after her dad’s childhood home, the estate looked as if it could have stepped out of eighteenth-century England with its gray stone façade, rounded windows, and five chimneys.
It was far too large for her and Sahira now that most of the workers who once lived there had fled, but she would never give it up. This was her childhood home, her father had loved the place, and she adored its many rooms, sweeping staircases, and fairy-tale appearance.
When she was young, Lexi would imagine she was a queen ruling her subjects or a ghost roaming the halls as she slipped from one room to the next. Now, she didn’t pretend anymore, but she hoped that if she ever found someone to love, she would one day raise her children here too.
That was if she didn’t get caught and killed for harboring a dark fae who was most likely a fugitive.
“I hope you’re not a complete asshole,” she muttered before hauling him out from under the leaves and dragging him across the yard.
The storm cellar was only a hundred yards away, but it seemed like a mile as she hurried across the open space while his feet dragged across the ground. To make matters worse, it felt like it got farther away with every step she took. When she finally made it to the cellar, she dug into her pocket and pulled out the key.
Her eyes darted around, but she still didn’t see anyone as she shifted his weight before bending to stick the key in the lock. Her fingers were surprisingly steady as she turned the key.
She slid the key back into her pocket and glanced around again. Only the lazy dog remained in view as she pulled open the doors and dragged him into the shadows. His booted feet thudded against the steps as she hauled him into the darkness.
Three feet into the room, she found the string for the single bulb hanging from the ceiling. Holding her breath, she pulled it and breathed a sigh when the bulb illuminated the damp space.
When she left the manor, the electricity was on, but that hadn’t meant it still was. Since the war, it often came and went. It had been more reliable lately as the humans started patching pieces of their world back together.
The bulb illuminated the shelves lining the walls. At one time, supplies packed those shelves, but barely anything remained.
This wasn’t the best place to leave him, but she had to. If he was a rebel and lycans were hunting him, they would track the scent of his blood here. She slid his arm from her shoulders and let him slump against the wall.
She was halfway up the stairs before she realized that not only was she most likely harboring a rebel, but he could also be a murderer, a criminal, or something far worse.
Why was she doing this? What was she thinking?
Her heart hammered as she spun back toward him. She had to get him out of here!
She couldn’t do this. She hated seeing someone else die, but she couldn’t put Sahira’s life in jeopardy by allowing this man to stay.
If he were a rebel, he’d stood against her father. Then, a disturbing possibility occurred to her; he could have been the one who killed her father.
Running back to his side, Lexi knelt beside him. She was reaching for him, determined to drag him out of here and into the woods to let him fend for himself, when his eyes cracked open.
“Thank you,” he croaked before passing out again.
Her hands froze before falling to her side. Her father may have opposed him, but he would never turn away an injured man, and he would never toss a defenseless man to the wolves, literally.
He could be the one who killed your dad.
The possibility hit her hard; it was true, but unlikely. And she still couldn’t be responsible for his almost certain death by turning him away.
She pushed herself away from him and fled up the stairs before the hunters showed up while she was still sitting in the dark, debating what to do. She locked the doors and left him behind.
Underneath the willow tree again, Lexi kicked the bloody leaves into the lake to bury the scent of blood on the air. Lifting her knife, she sliced open her palm and let her blood drip onto the earth.
Lycans, or any immortal, could detect the scent of blood on the air, but she hoped with his bloody leaves gone, her aroma would mask the dark fae’s. Pushing aside the branches, she slipped out from beneath the limbs and scented the air as she searched for more of his blood.
She discovered more drops of it, and as she walked, she used her foot to smear his blood into the dirt while letting her blood fall onto his. The blood ended at the edge of the lake. Kneeling beside the water, she bent to wash her hands.
Studying the water’s pristine surface, she searched for anyone else on the shoreline, but she didn’t see anyone in the shadows of the trees. At least half a mile wide and just as long, the dark fae could have entered the water anywhere along the shoreline, but she hoped it was from across the lake.
She had no idea how he could have swum so far in his condition, but entering the water would have thrown off his trackers until he arrived on her shoreline. And she could only hope she’d done enough to cover his scent.
Pulling her hands from the water, she was relieved to see the wound had already healed. Now, she had to take care of her guest.
At one point in time, she would have run into half a dozen people on her way back to the manor; she encountered no one now. But then, there was no one to run into anymore.
When her father was alive, and before the war, a fair number of people worked the manor. Some lived there, but many fled during the war.
They were shocked to discover they worked for someone more than human, and many chose to be with their families. They also hoped to flee the destruction, but there was no escape.
The dragons had leveled most of the major cities throughout the world. What the Lord of the Shadow Realms unleashed on earth was something far worse than any of them ever expected, and now they were all suffering the consequences of it.
The humans knew of their existence, and immortals had gained nothing from it except more death.
Yes, the Lord had the dragons to keep the mortals in line, and immortals possessed abilities and strengths far beyond the humans, but the humans still had weapons that could maim and kill them.
Most immortals could blend in with humans and still choose to do so, but she’d heard tales of immortals who refused to blend in anymore. After years of going incognito, they were embracing their newfound freedom. Unfortunately, that was also causing problems.
After the war, the humans were petrified, broken, and resentful. They never had any warning that something beyond their realm existed before the Lord smashed their reality to pieces. And they hadn’t been given much time to adapt before immortals started taking over.
The war between the immortals was over, but she suspected the war with the humans was just beginning. The Lord of the Shadow Realms couldn’t destroy them all; vampires and both the light and dark fae fed on humans. They could also feed on immortals, but many immortals did not appreciate that, so vampires and the fae mostly relied on mortals for sustenance.
But then, with as crazy as he was, the Lord might decide to destroy every human if they became a problem and require immortals to feed only on each other. Things would become desperate then as few immortals allowed others to feed on them in any way.
She didn’t know how the light fae were surviving. They’d refused to fight, and because of that, immortals reviled them. At one time, she often saw them in the human realm, but she hadn’t seen any in almost a year.
Unlike the dark fae, who fed on the energy produced by sex, the light fae absorbed the joy humans emitted, and even if they weren’t scorned and terrorized by other immortals when they were in the human realm, there was little joy left in this world. But that was their problem to handle; she had her own to deal with right now.
Glancing over her shoulder, she made sure no one was around before she entered the manor, strode down the hall, and jogged up the sweeping stairs to the second floor. At the top, the hallway ran straight ahead of her for fifty feet before veering around a corner.
Her steps were muffled by the dark blue carpet running the length of the hall. Unlike the first floor, where most of the rooms had gray stone walls, the upper level was drywalled and painted. The walls were a cream color and lined with family pictures.
The complete silence still felt so odd, and she resisted hugging herself as the lonely feel of the place weighed her down.
Stopping outside a door halfway down the hall, she took a deep breath before gripping the knob and shoving the door open. She didn’t look around; she couldn’t as tears filled her eyes while the scent of her dad filled her nose. He’d smelled of the outdoors and mint, and those aromas lingered in his room.
She blinked back her tears as she opened his drawers. She removed a black sweater and some socks. Unable to keep up with the flow of tears, she gave up trying as she ran to his closet, pulled out a pair of jeans, and fled the room. Closing the door behind her, she leaned against it as she wiped at the tears streaming down her cheeks.
It had been six months since word of his death arrived, yet the knife of grief digging into her heart made it feel like it was just yesterday. She didn’t know if it would ever get better, but she wouldn’t be returning to his room any time soon.
Shoving herself away from the door, she buried her misery as she hurried to one of the hall closets and pulled it open. She removed a couple of towels before returning to the first floor and entering the kitchen.
Dinner was already in the oven, but Sahira wasn’t around. She had to be somewhere nearby as she would never let one of her meals burn, but Lexi was glad her aunt wasn’t here; she couldn’t deal with questions right now.
She rushed to fill a pot with water before Sahira returned. She ignored the warm liquid splashing over her hand as she glanced around. She could always tell Sahira one of the horses injured themselves, Sahira wouldn’t question it or go to the barn to check, but she didn’t want to lie to her.
When she finished filling the pot, she left the room and was careful not to spill anything as she rushed down the hall. Her feet didn’t make a sound on the red rug covering the gray stone floors. She kept her ears attuned for some hint of Sahira, but the manor remained unnaturally subdued.
No, it wasn’t unnatural anymore. This was the way it was now.
She slipped through the library's open double doors and paused to glance back into the hall. From the kitchen, she heard the back door click shut. Sahira must have been out in the garden.
Lexi turned her attention from the hall and crossed the room toward the large, gray stone fireplace. Overhead, the dark wood beams running across the cathedral ceiling didn’t block the sun streaming through the skylights. It illuminated the hardwood floors and brought out the gold in the blue and gold Oriental rug in the room's center.
Normally, she loved the way the sun spilled through the skylights and the large, arched windows making up most of the wall on her right, but she barely noticed it now. Just as she barely noticed the thousands of books lining the shelves to her left, behind her, and around the fireplace.
She’d read every book in this room, many of them more than once. She’d always spent a lot of time here, but since her dad died, it had become her favorite sanctuary. Two overstuffed love seats faced the fireplace. The one on the left was hers, while her father favored the one on the right.
Often, as a child, she would lay on her belly on that rug. She’d prop her chin on her hands and kick her feet in the air while gazing at the fire and listening to her father read whatever new tale they were venturing on together. He had a thing for the classics, his favorite being Oedipus. She had a thing for fantasy, her favorite being any Harry Potter book.
She stopped next to the fireplace and glanced back to make sure Sahira wasn’t around. Her aunt knew about the tunnels, but she would question why Lexi was entering them.
After every tunnel was built, Sahira would go into it and cast a spell to keep them cloaked from the outside world. No one who didn’t know they were there would ever be able to find one of the tunnels.
But she couldn’t go back and close the library doors because Sahira would wonder about that too. Lexi had to take the chance she could slip into the tunnels without Sahira knowing.
Standing beside the fireplace, she kept her attention focused on the doors as she pressed one of the rocks. It pushed in, and something clicked. When the inside of the fireplace swung open, cool air drifted out from the shadows beyond. Taking a deep breath, Lexi prepared herself for what she was about to do.
Once she crossed this threshold, there was no turning back from her decision, but then, she’d already come too far to turn around now. She’d already brought the dark fae further onto her property, and now she had to care for him.
Lexi picked up the bottle of blue potion and lifted it. Inside, the golden liquid sparked a little as it swished back and forth. From behind the counter, the witch with the cool blue eyes and black hair watched her.
“How much?” Lexi asked about the healing potion.
The dark fae in the tunnels had healed some since yesterday, but it wasn’t fast enough for her liking. She intended to get him out of her life as soon as possible, and if the witches’ concoction helped with that, then she would pay for it. Normally, she would have asked Sahira for this, but she couldn’t do that now.
“Two hundred,” the witch said.
Lexi suppressed a snort of disbelief and dipped a hand into her pocket. It was highway robbery, and they both knew it, but she couldn’t risk drawing attention to herself by haggling today.
She hated being fleeced by the witch, but at least she could rely on the witches’ discretion. The sign next to the register announced all sales were final and confidential.
The witches were known to keep the secrets of their clientele. Immortals and humans wouldn’t buy from them as often if they were running around discussing their purchases. The witch would never reveal what Lexi purchased here.
She removed her small wallet from her pocket and took out two hundred carisle. She didn’t have to look at the Shadow Realms' currency to know that dragons marked the front of it.
The witch smiled as she took the money and slipped it into a leather pouch. She took the potion from Lexi and put it into another leather pouch before giving it back to Lexi.
“Thanks,” Lexi muttered and stifled her impulse to add, “for screwing me.”
Turning away from the makeshift, wooden counter, she ignored the people gathered inside the small hut as she made her way through the shadowed interior. Everyone else in the store was human; she could tell by the distinct lack of power emanating from them. They all stopped their browsing of the potions and trinkets lining the shelves to watch her go.
The humans didn’t have Shadow Realms currency, but the witch behind the counter would take their money. Lexi felt a stab of guilt as she met their curious stares. They all looked tired and more than a little beat down by their new lot in life.
As she passed a woman, the woman shoved a black lump back onto the shelf. A sign above the lump guaranteed it would provide enough food for a week.
Pity tugged at Lexi’s heart when the thin woman bowed her head and her lank hair fell forward to shield her features. The humans hadn’t asked for this; they’d never known it was coming, and now they were suffering the consequences because a madman wouldn’t give up the throne that had corrupted him.
She barely had carisles left, but she found her hand dipping toward her wallet. The price on the stone was fifty dollars or about twenty carisle. The witch had robbed her blind, but apparently, she had a soft spot for the starving masses. Maybe she wasn’t such a smug ass after all.
The woman lifted the stone again, and Lexi scented tears before she put it back and turned away. Lexi stopped and pulled her wallet out. She removed a twenty-dollar carisle and walked over to the woman.
The woman started to turn away, but Lexi grasped her wrist to halt her. When the woman turned back to her, Lexi saw her round belly. She was only weeks away from delivery.
“Here,” Lexi said as she shoved the money into the woman’s hand.
The woman started to shake her head. “I can’t.”
“Take it,” Lexi insisted.
She could feel the witch’s eyes on her, but she didn’t look back. The woman’s fingers curled briefly around Lexi’s as tears rolled down her cheeks.
Lexi pulled her hand away and walked out of the store before she started to cry too. She’d grown up in the mortal realm; she was more comfortable around humans than immortals. She’d grown up with them; they were her people, they were suffering, and she hated it.
Stepping onto the crowded dirt road, she ignored the crush of humans and immortals surrounding her as she swung the leather pouch onto her shoulder and slipped into the crowd.
Cole despised the crowded human and immortal markets that had sprung up in the cities and towns since the war ended. He understood their necessity as humans scrambled to survive, and those who still had fortunes sought to get their hands on things they’d only ever dreamed about. He preferred it when the markets only catered to immortals and were hidden from the mortals.
“Watch it,” Brokk growled when a passing lycan’s shoulder hit his.
The lycan turned to look at Brokk, who lifted his hand in the air. The lycan took in the ciphers on Brokk’s hand and kept walking. Not many immortals sought to pick a fight with the dark fae. The lycan was larger and stronger, but they all feared the dark fae’s powers.
“Bunch of hairy assholes,” Brokk muttered.
Cole didn’t take offense to his brother’s comment. He couldn’t count the number of times he’d called vamps bloodsucking leeches around Brokk.
“I do not have a hairy asshole,” Cole said.
“You never know what the future holds.”
“It better not hold hairy assholes.”
Brokk grinned at him before turning to avoid a herd of humans who scurried past with their heads down. Cole barely acknowledged the humans as he tried not to inhale the stench of dirt and body odor wafting from them. The sweet stench of witches’ potions and burnt wood, as well as the ever-present reek of the distant burning city, hung heavily on the air.
The open road that vehicles once traversed was now a thoroughfare crowded with ramshackle huts and hastily assembled buildings. They’d turned the broken and cracked four-lane road into little more than a lane.
Many of the shops belonged to witches, but there were plenty of other immortals looking to sell things they’d crafted and the food they grew on their land. There were also stalls with vamps who sought to pay for blood. The vamp stalls and food booths were the most crowded with humans, but the witches had a fair amount of business too.
He’d prefer not to be here, but if they were going to know what was happening in the world and how things were going, the markets were the best place to go. Plus, there was a chance he might run into Lexi.
It was a small chance, but one he was willing to take. He’d never been to Del’s home, but he knew it was somewhere nearby. And if he didn’t find her here, he’d….
What?
Hunt her down?
And how would he explain that to Brokk? They were close, they always had been, but he’d never gone out of his way to find a woman. Brokk would find it odd; he found it odd.
However, the possibility of seeing her again intrigued and excited him.
As they walked, he listened to the chatter of the humans and immortals who passed. Most conversations focused on securing supplies to keep their families alive, but there were a few murmurs of discontent amongst the crowd.
He ignored those whispers. Of course, these people were unhappy; nothing of the world they knew remained. What he sought were whispers about where some of the rebels were hiding; he wanted to know where his brothers were.
He was shifting through the conversations swirling around him when he detected the faint hint of strawberries on the air. He scanned the crowd as he drew the scent deeper into him.
He’d smelled strawberries thousands of times before, but this was different. It was fresh and welcoming, and he knew it was her.
Turning, he searched the crowd. He stood almost a head taller than most of those surrounding him, so he could see over them with relative ease.
And then he spotted her exiting a witches’ store and shrugging a pouch onto her shoulder. The sun emphasized the different shades of red in her auburn hair and illuminated her delicate features.
She stepped back from a passing lycan before turning and walking in the opposite direction of him.
“I’ll be back,” he said to Brokk.
Before his brother could reply, Cole started after her.
The scent of baking bread tickled Lexi’s nose, and her stomach rumbled in response. She tried to recall the last time she ate, but she couldn’t quite remember.
She should eat something, but she had to get back to the manor so she could give the fae the potion and get him out of her life. However, it was a long walk home, and she’d prefer to have something to munch on while she made the trek.
Unable to resist, Lexi stopped at a cart selling all kinds of baked goods. Her stomach rumbled louder, and it took all she had not to lick her lips as she studied the delicious treats laid out on trays before her.
“Can I get you something?” the woman standing behind the cart asked.
Lexi pointed at one of the cinnamon buns. “Yes, I’ll take one of those.”
The woman beamed at her as she used a piece of paper to pick up the bun. She slid the pastry into a bag while Lexi handed over more of her money. Lexi tried not to drool as she held the bag and waited for change.
In the distance, the faint strains of a guitar floated through the air. The notes were followed by a sweet, lilting voice that barely carried over the din of the crowd.
“I’ll take one too,” a deep voice said from beside her.
Everything around Lexi went as still as a broken clock. Like the clock pendulum that stopped ticking, she swore her heart ceased beating before giving a mighty thump that rattled her rib cage.
She knew that voice; even if she lived another ten thousand years, she would never forget that voice. She would always recall the deep timbre of his words as he stood behind her in the room full of luna flowers. Always remember the way his warm breath felt against her ear and how it stirred her hair.
She hadn’t believed she’d ever see him again, let alone see him again so soon. He was one of the elite immortals, he moved in entirely different circles than her, and she wasn’t returning to the Gloaming anytime soon.
However, she didn’t have to look up to know Cole stood beside her.
She couldn’t stop her head from tilting further and further back until she found his vibrant blue eyes on her even as the woman held a bag out to him. Her breath gave a small hitch. She wanted to touch the tip of one of his ears; would he like it?
The black, mortal shirt he wore clung to his broad chest, and the short sleeves emphasized the thick muscles of his biceps. His jeans were loose-fitting enough to be comfortable but tight enough to make her mouth water.
The corners of his eyes crinkled, and his thick lips curved into the sexiest smile she’d ever seen. He was a good foot taller than her five-seven height and easily weighed a hundred pounds more than her one hundred thirty.
He should intimidate her, and she imagined many were terrified of him, but she didn’t feel afraid. Instead, before she could stop herself, she grinned at him like an idiot.
“It’s you,” she said.
Cole smiled in return. “It’s you.”
A shout from somewhere to her right drew her attention and dampened her happiness as she recalled where they were. Cole took the bag from the woman who was still holding it out to him and slipped her some money. Clasping her elbow, he led her away from the booth.
“What are you doing here?” Lexi asked and then tried not to blush at the abruptness of her question. “I’m sorry; I didn’t mean to sound rude.”
A teasing glimmer shone in his eyes. “You didn’t expect to find me here?”
“Not at all.”
“Why not? There are things here I like to purchase too.”
That made sense, but marketplaces such as this always existed in the mortal realm; she’d gone to them often. This one came to life after the war, and unlike the markets of the past, humans also shopped it. There was no reason to keep the immortal markets hidden anymore.
During her many trips to the private and open markets, she’d never seen one royal fae. She’d heard countless rumors about them while shopping the immortal wares, but they could get everything they needed in the Shadow Realms.
“Plus,” he said, “the Lord of the Shadow Realms likes us to keep an ear out for any threats that might arise and to search for the rebels.”
His words reminded her of the dark fae locked in her tunnels, and her appetite vanished. She clenched her bag as some of her excitement over seeing him vanished.
She was harboring a rebel, and if he knew about it, not only would he turn in the fae, but he’d hand her over too. It thrilled her to see him, and he seemed happy to see her also, but his loyalty was to the Lord.
She wanted nothing to do with any of the political turmoil the world remained in; however, she’d put herself right in the middle of it when she decided to hide a war criminal.
And she’d pitted herself against this man and the monster who’d ruthlessly unleashed his dragons on countless innocents. She didn’t want anything to happen to the fae she hid, but she wanted even less for Cole to become her enemy.
She liked him, and he made her feel alive in a way she hadn’t since her father died. It was a bad idea to feel anything other than apprehension for a dark fae, but she couldn’t stop the butterflies in her stomach or the increase of her pulse when she was around him.
“Oh,” she muttered.
She realized she sounded a little dumb, but she had no idea what to say. Oh good, you’re all looking to kill more immortals, didn’t feel like the appropriate, sarcastic response.
“And what are you doing here?” he asked.
Lexi held up her bag of food. She couldn’t bring herself to lie to him, and she doubted she could pull off a convincing lie, so she hoped he would take this as explanation enough.
“They’re some of my favorites,” he said.
“Mine too.”
A commotion from somewhere to her left drew Lexi’s attention to the crowd. Startled cries filled the air as humans and immortals pushed back toward them. When Cole stepped before her, his large body blocked the retreating group from shoving her into the food stand.
“What the fuck?” he muttered.
Lexi was thinking the same thing as a higher-pitched scream rent the air and a child started to sob for her mother. Lexi stepped forward; she wasn’t a fighter, but she’d be damned if she let someone hurt a child.
Then the crying child, enveloped securely in the arms of her lycan mother, rushed past them. Cole clasped Lexi’s arm as he held her firmly behind him. Despite the commotion, she barely stopped herself from gaping at the hand engulfing almost her entire forearm.
Then the crowd parted to reveal a group of lycan shoving through them. With a sinking heart, Lexi spotted Malakai at the front of the pack.
She glanced at the sun beating down on the earth and Malakai. Unlike her, he was a full-blooded vampire who never should have been out in the daylight, but as she thought it, the sun caught and reflected off the red amulet hanging from his neck.
She didn’t know where it had come from, but she sensed its power and suspected it somehow allowed him to walk about in the day. She didn’t understand how anything could be powerful enough to accomplish that. It had to be the amulet as she’d never seen him in the daytime before the war, yet he wasn’t catching on fire now.
With his shoulders back, pride and contempt emanated from Malakai as he surveyed the crowd. Then his brown eyes landed on Cole before sliding to her. Surprise widened them for the briefest of seconds, but they hardened when he spotted Cole’s hand wrapped protectively around her arm.
A smug smile curved his lips as he stopped in front of them. He was about five inches shorter than Cole, and he didn’t emanate power like the fae prince, but his eyes shimmered with malice when they shifted from Cole’s grip on her arm to her face.
“Elexiandra,” he greeted in a voice that sent chills down her spine.
“Malakai,” she replied.
“What is the meaning of this?” Cole demanded.
As he surveyed the lycan gathered around Malakai, he recognized all of them, but they weren’t part of his uncle’s pack, and he didn’t trust any of them. They all fought on the same side during the war, but for completely different reasons.
“We’re hunting a traitor,” Malakai replied.
Cole resisted smashing the arrogant grin off Malakai’s face as he glanced at Lexi again. The intensity of his reaction startled him.
Despite his lycan blood, Cole was colder and more calculating like the dark fae than impulsive and explosive like the lycan. However, the look in Malakai’s eyes as he stared at Lexi had him imagining tearing the vamp’s heart out and shoving it down his throat.
There was more than anger in the vamp’s stare; there was also a lust that made Cole feel more murderous than he had during the entire war. He’d never liked Malakai, but the wolf part of him marked the vamp for death.
“Perhaps you’ve seen the traitor,” Malakai said to Cole.
“Who is it?” Cole asked, and the question came out as more of a growl.
“Your brother. Orin. Some of the boys” —he waved a hand at the lycan surrounding him— “almost had him, but he managed to get away.”
“We fucked him up real bad,” one of the lycans bragged.
Cole managed to keep his face impassive as a knife of dread lodged in his heart and twisted deep. They were hunting Orin, and his brother was injured. Was it so bad he wouldn’t be able to hide?
“I haven’t seen Orin in a couple of years,” Cole replied with an indifference he didn’t feel.
He couldn’t lose another brother.
“Hmm.” Malakai rubbed his chin while he studied Cole. “That’s too bad. You could always help us look for him.”
“You can’t handle it yourself, Malakai?”
“Of course I can, but you know him better than any of us. You know how he thinks. Maybe it’s you who can’t handle watching your traitor of a brother die.”
A seething tempest boiled inside Cole until he felt like a volcano about to blow, but he smiled at Malakai. “My brother’s been dead to me for years.”
It wasn’t true. He would always love Orin. Out of all his brothers, the two of them butted heads the most, but Orin would forever be his brother. Orin was the second of his father’s children, and only thirty-five years separated them.
They hadn’t grown up together, but Cole had watched him grow from a babe to a child to a stubborn adult with a powerful will. And once Orin was old enough, they trained together, laughed and drank together, and developed a bond that came with blood and shared experiences.
And now Orin would be hunted as long as the Lord of the Shadow Realms remained on the throne.
Lexi was extremely glad Malakai and Cole were focused on each other as the blood drained from her face and her stomach plummeted into her toes.
Malakai, her freaking neighbor, was looking for a traitor. A traitor who was attacked by lycan and Cole’s brother. A dark fae who was sitting in her tunnels.
She had to get away from these two and Orin away from her home. What was she thinking by helping him?
It took everything she had not to slump against the stand behind her as the pouch slung over her shoulder suddenly felt as if it weighed a thousand pounds. She’d bought a healing potion. If any of them asked what was in the pouch or demanded to see it, she had no idea what she would say.
Sahira easily could have made what the pouch contained; why would she come to the market to purchase it? Her mind spun as she tried to come up with some plausible answer, but the only thing she could come up with was that Sahira was out of the ingredients and they had a sick animal at home.
It was flimsy at best and easy enough to disprove, but it might be enough to get her out of here and back to the manor. She’d have to tell Sahira about it then, but she’d worry about that if the time came.
Why had she decided this would be a good idea?
She almost clutched the pouch against her chest, but it would only draw attention, so she restrained herself from doing so.
She glanced around for an escape. There was nowhere for her to go. She couldn’t exactly run away without making them a little curious.
So, she had to stand here and try not to look like a cornered rabbit surrounded by powerful men who would turn against her if they learned what she’d done.
And if she managed to get out of this, she had to go home, give Orin the potion, and get him out of her tunnels before she put Sahira in jeopardy. No, she’d already done that with her reckless actions. Now, she had to fix it.
“Then, if you happen across Orin, you’ll let us know,” Malakai said.
“I’ll bring him in myself,” Cole replied.
Lexi tried not to wince at the harshness of those words. Cole was talking about his brother. They’d opposed each other, but how could he be so callous about his brother?
Because he’s a dark fae.
No, it was more than that. He was an immortal, and many of them weren’t known for their kindness; Malakai and his pack of lycan proved that. She didn’t belong here amid these ruthless, coldblooded men, but she’d inadvertently inserted herself in the middle of this awful mess.
“I’m sure you will,” Malakai said before turning to her. “I’ll see you soon, Elexiandra.”
The look in his eyes made her blood run cold. He would come to her manor soon. Lexi didn’t reply as Malakai walked away with the lycan following him.
Gradually, the marketplace came alive around them again. With the Lord’s men out of the way, people and immortals resumed their day while she and Cole remained standing by the woman’s food stand.
Then Cole turned toward her, and she saw the steely gleam in his eyes. She forced herself not to gulp as she considered what he would do if he learned she was harboring his fugitive brother, a man he would hand over for execution.
“How do you know Malakai?” Cole asked.
How did she answer that question?
He’s the bane of my existence. He thinks he’s going to marry me, and I’m terrified he’ll find a way to succeed.
For some reason, Malakai believed she was his consort, or maybe he didn’t. Maybe he saw her as something to own and not as his fated one. The more she considered it, the more she believed that was more likely. He saw her as an accessory and not his consort.
Besides, she’d heard that when any vampire found their consort in another vampire, it was a mutual realization. If she was Malakai’s consort, wouldn’t she feel it too? And she most certainly did not.
But then again, probably not. She couldn’t transport like vampires, she walked freely in the sun, and she wasn’t as strong as them. She was only half vampire, and that might make it impossible to feel the pull of the consort bond.
She didn’t tell Cole any of these things because this man did not care about her problems. Instead, she simply said, “He’s my neighbor.”
“I see,” he murmured, but his attention remained on the direction Malakai went.
“I have to go,” she said and gave a subtle tug on her arm.
Seeming to recall he was still holding her arm, his thumb stroked her skin. A fiery tendril of heat worked its way out from where he touched her. It spread through her belly and into her legs until her knees almost gave out.
This was a deadly game she played with him. However, she couldn’t bring herself to pull her arm away, and when he stepped closer, she didn’t move.
He could learn the truth of what she’d done with his brother and destroy her for being a traitor without breaking a sweat, but she didn’t care.
No one had ever made her feel this alive, and now that he was awakening her to the wonder of his touch, she craved more of it. She gulped and tipped her head back to meet his piercing blue eyes. He held her gaze while he caressed her skin in slow, tantalizing circles that made her mouth go dry and her heart race.
Her father had sheltered her for her whole life. She’d never understood his fierce need to keep her protected, but she also hadn’t rebelled against it. She had hundreds, if not thousands of years, to see the world, and she was in no rush to leave her safe, much-loved home.
But now, her father was gone, and for the first time, she yearned for something more than her home, her friends, and family; she wanted him.
And if the way his eyes darkened as they scanned her was any indication, he wanted her too.
She was losing herself to him when a powerful roar shook the earth. Screams rent the air, and people raced for cover as a blast of wind rattled the boards in the stand behind her. Dust stung her skin as it whipped up from the ground and swirled down the street.
Cole threw his arms up to protect her from the pebbles and dirt blasting against her skin, but it didn’t do much to stop it. Another bellow reverberated through the day, and then an enormous shadow passed overhead as a dragon soared over the top of them.
It was so large it blocked the sun and brought an early twilight to the land. Its belly was a paler shade of red than the rest of it. Its wings spread a good hundred feet wide, and its legs were tucked up against its underside.
It extended its long neck as another roar issued from it, but thankfully, it didn’t unleash a wave of fire. This creature wasn’t here to destroy; it was here to intimidate and remind the world of who ruled it. It was succeeding.
Her mouth parted in awe at the magnificent, beautiful, terrifying creature. As a child, she’d dreamt of riding dragons and pretended she ruled the throne and the beasts who guarded it. As an adult, she didn’t find anything fun or fanciful about them.
They were stone-cold killers who were ruled by a madman. The destruction they unleashed on earth wasn’t the dragon’s fault; they were only doing as commanded. However, she still loathed the beast who gave the Lord so much of his brutal power.
She’d never been this close to a dragon before, never felt so small and vulnerable. This thing could kill them without ever knowing they were there, but she was more mesmerized by it than fearful.
Then it was climbing higher into the sky where it met up with two of its brethren, a red dragon with a burst of yellow on its belly and a yellow one with a stripe of black on its back. The three of them rolled through the air as they snapped at each other before separating and soaring toward the smoldering city.
“They’re magnificent,” she whispered.
“They’re something,” Cole muttered.
She glanced at him as someone called his name. He turned toward the voice as the people who fled the dragons crept out of their hiding places.
A tall, blond man strode toward them as the marketplace became crowded again. She recognized the man as Cole’s younger brother, Brokk.
“They’re hunting for Orin,” Brokk said as he stopped before them. He didn’t notice her as his attention remained riveted on Cole. “Malakai is leading the party.”
“I know,” Cole said and stepped closer to her.
Brokk finally noticed her, and then his eyes narrowed on Cole’s hand on her arm. He frowned at Cole before turning his attention to her. His eyebrows lifted before he focused on Cole again.
“We should help them,” Brokk said.
Lexi suppressed a shudder at this sign of brutality from the brothers. She pitied poor Orin, but he had to find a new place to hide.
When Cole looked at her, she saw reluctance in his eyes, but he gave a brisk nod. “We should,” he agreed. “It was good to see you again, Lexi.”
“You also, Cole,” she managed to say in a far more normal tone than she’d expected.
He held onto her for a moment longer before releasing her. She instantly missed the connection between them, but she’d never been so happy to be free. When he walked away, she turned and fled into the crowd.
Lexi knelt before Orin in one of the dozens of tunnels running beneath the manor and spreading throughout the hundred acres of land they owned. Some of the tunnels went beyond their land, but most didn’t.
She had no idea why her father had so many tunnels built when she was a baby and young child, but he was adamant she and Sahira learn them all. He’d done all the work of building the tunnels, installing gates, and stacking supplies himself. It took him ten years from start to finish, as he was still constructing them when she was a teen.
When she was younger, he made them run drills to escape the manor if there was ever an attack. Now, she knew the dark, concrete halls beneath the earth as well as she knew the rooms of the manor. She knew where to locate the emergency supplies down here, so they could survive beneath the ground for a few months if it came to it.
The possibility of such a thing made her skin crawl, but after seeing what the dragons did to the earth, she was glad her father had been so prepared. She’d always considered it crazy and overkill, but now the tunnels offered her a sanctuary she’d tarnished by bringing Orin here.
He did all this before the war, but the Lord was talking about letting mortals know of their existence decades before the war. Her father once told her he would do anything to protect his family, including building these tunnels.
“What is that?” Orin inquired in a raspy voice as she removed the potion from the pouch.
“It’s a healing potion,” Lexi answered as she uncorked the bottle. “I bought it from a witch.”
“I’m not taking a witches’ brew. I’ll heal on my own.”
“Not fast enough.”
“What does that mean?”
His fathomless black eyes were bloodshot when they met hers, and she saw the pain reflected in them. She moved the potion toward him, but he grabbed her wrist and held it before them. Despite his weakness, his grip was strong.
“What does that mean?” he demanded.
“They’re looking for you, and they can’t find you here. I have to protect my family. You have to take this and leave here… soon.”
“Who is looking for me?”
“Malakai and a group of lycans.” She paused as she contemplated not telling him about his brothers; he had enough going on without adding that betrayal to the mix, but he needed to know what he faced once he left here. “Your brothers, Cole and Brokk, are with them. They can’t find you here.”
His eyes darkened at the mention of his brothers, and his nostrils flared. “Those bastards.”
She didn’t blame him for being angry at his brothers; she would be incensed, but something inside her rankled when he called Cole a bastard. Though, she supposed it was an adequate description for the man trying to kill him.
“I can’t leave here,” he said.
“You can’t stay here.”
A muscle twitched in his cheek as his jaw clenched. He was gorgeous with his narrow face, high cheekbones, pointed chin, and hawkish nose, but he radiated an unsettling brutality. He wasn’t as handsome as Cole, but there was no denying the similarities between them, especially when it came to their ruthlessness.
“Are you going to make me leave?” he asked.
She didn’t know how to respond because they both knew she wasn’t strong enough to make him leave. “I’m helping you.”
“And you’re going to keep helping me.”
She gawked at him, and then, feeling like an idiot, she closed her mouth, but she couldn’t quite keep it closed. “I saved you.”
She felt like an idiot for saying that. It was obvious he didn’t care she’d saved him and was trying to help him. All he cared about was protecting his ass.
Why did you bring him here?
These tunnels were their sanctuary, and she’d risked them by exposing their existence to this ungrateful asshole.
She mentally smacked herself half a dozen times, but berating herself wouldn’t do any good. It was too late. She’d already done this stupid, reckless thing, and she couldn’t undo it. It was time to face the consequences.
“You can’t stay here,” she said.
“I can, and I am, unless you plan to turn me in, which means turning yourself in. You knew who I was when you hid me. That’s why you hid me away. Do you think they’ll take it easy on you if you turn me in now?”
“I had no idea who you were when I brought you in here.”
“Maybe you didn’t know I’m a dark fae prince, but you knew I was a rebel.”
She couldn’t argue that. “I have others to protect!”
“So do I, which is why I’m not going back out there right now.”
“You can’t stay here.”
Her teeth grated together as she resisted hitting him. She’d never hit anyone before, but she’d love to bash in Orin’s face.
“I can stay, and I am,” he stated. “Get used to it. I’m not leaving here until they finish searching for me.”
“You’re putting innocent lives at risk.”
“I don’t care.”
Without realizing she was going to do it, she launched a punch at him. Even injured, he was far faster than her, and he caught her hand with ease. She considered trying to hit him with her other hand, but he would catch that one too, and it would only infuriate her more.
She felt like an ill-tempered child as she glowered at him and jerked at her hand. He released her, and she scrambled back before throwing the potion at him. “Drink it or suffer; I don’t care what you do.”
He fumbled for the potion as it started to seep into the earth. He righted it and set it aside. She tossed the food and water she’d brought for him onto the ground.
“There’s enough for a few days,” she said before turning on her heel and stalking away.
“Lexi.”
She didn’t stop to look back at him, but she wished she’d never told him her name. At the time, she’d foolishly believed that because she saved his life, she could trust him with the information. She’d been a naïve idiot.
She wasn’t prepared for a world where brothers turned on brothers and where the one she saved turned on her like a rabid dog.
“If you tell them I’m here, I’ll tell them you’re a scorned lover who decided to turn me in and you’ve been a rebel spy this entire time,” he said.
Her teeth ground together until she swore they’d shatter, but she still didn’t look back. If there were any way she could do it and survive, she’d gladly hand him over to Cole and Brokk.
“You keep me safe, and I’ll keep you safe,” he taunted.
“Screw you.”
She stepped through one of the gates her father installed and closed it behind her. She didn’t bother to tell him that she would keep him safe. They both knew she wouldn’t turn him in, but if he had any doubts about her intentions, she wanted him to fester in them.
“I’ll see you soon!” he called after her.
Now she understood why his brothers were hunting him.
Lexi closed her eyes and leaned against the fireplace as she tried to calm the anger coursing through her veins. That asshole!
How could he do this to her when she’d put herself on the line to save him?
Because he’s a damn dark fae, and I should have known better than to trust him.
It was true, but it didn’t matter now. No matter how much she wanted to, she couldn’t change what she’d done. She’d put herself in this position, and the best she could hope for was to somehow crawl out of this mess without getting anyone killed.
She stepped away from the fireplace and strode over to sit in one of the chairs. She sank into the inviting cushion and stared at the fireplace as she tried not to think about how long Orin would hold her hostage.
“Lexi?”
She almost squealed and jumped out of the chair when Sahira said her name. She spun in the chair to discover her aunt standing in the doorway. Sahira had been in the garden when she slipped into the tunnels; she often spent a couple of hours there a day, but she’d apparently finished early today.
Thankfully, she hadn’t caught Lexi coming out of the tunnel. From now on, she’d have to use a different entrance into the tunnels.
“Yes?” she croaked.
Sahira didn’t seem to notice anything off as she smiled at her. “Would you like some tea?”
Lexi glanced at the clock and was amazed to see it was already their normal teatime. Where had the day gone?
“Yes, of course,” she said as she rose from the chair and walked toward her aunt.
Should she tell Sahira about Orin? Her aunt might know what to do about him, but then Lexi would have to involve her in this mess.
Right now, Sahira could claim ignorance about Lexi’s actions, and it could save her life. Or at least Lexi hoped it could. If she told Sahira, she would be pissed at Orin for his threats, and things could get ugly. Sahira was a strong witch, but she wasn’t strong enough to take on a dark fae.
No, she couldn’t tell her aunt about what she’d done. She’d already put her in danger by allowing Orin into the tunnels; keeping her in the dark was the best way to keep Sahira safe. Lexi had dug herself into this hole, and she would get herself out without endangering her aunt.
She stepped aside as Sahira entered the room with two cups of tea. Lexi’s mouth watered as a sweet scent wafted from the delicate cups. For as long as she could remember, the two of them sat down every day to enjoy a cup of tea together.
When she was little, they would sit around her small table and fill plastic cups with tea. They’d pretend to be queens while they sipped their tea and dreamed of magical worlds far from the human realm.
As part witch, Sahira had traveled to the land of witches a few times and several other Shadow Realms, but as part vampire, she rarely felt welcome in those realms. However, when she was younger, Sahira loved to regale Lexi with those stories as she poured tea and lifted a dainty pinky finger while sipping her drink.
As she grew, they stopped sitting around her little pink table and drinking out of plastic cups, but they always sat together every day. When she got older, she also learned Sahira’s stories, though wondrous, were tinged with sadness and adversity.
Sahira traveled to those realms, but they never welcomed her with open arms because she was part vampire and part witch. She learned more about how her aunt never felt welcome in the witches’ realm and the intolerance she faced there.
The witches’ hatred for vampires hadn’t lessened over the eight hundred years that had passed since a vampire killed the witch queen in a fit of jealousy. The two had been lovers, but the queen had decided to take another to her bed, and the vampire was not happy about it.
In retaliation for her death, all the witch covens joined together. Not only did they slaughter the vampire who killed their queen, but they also unleashed their wrath on the vampire realm.
They leveled that realm, making it uninhabitable for vampires and driving them out. When they fled to other realms, the witches’ wrath followed them, and they were evicted from those realms by the witches and the immortals who resided there.
No one wanted to incur the witches’ wrath by harboring the vampires. Besides, known for their arrogance, vampires weren’t well-liked before they killed the witch queen, so not many other immortals wanted them around.
They could have fled to the far outer Shadow Realms, but many of those realms were inhospitable or inhabited by terrifying creatures, so that left them with Earth. When the vampires fled to the mortal realm, the witches, drained from the destruction of their realm, could not continue their attack on them.
The vampires were getting ready to go back after the witches, who wouldn’t have been able to put up much of a fight, when the Lord at that time put an end to it before the two immortals destroyed each other.
Neither the vampires nor witches were happy when the Lord intervened, but they both relented. They either accepted the decision or ended up being hunted by the Lord, and none of them would ever know peace.
However, the witches did succeed in forcing the arrogant vamps out of the Shadow Realms. They contented themselves with this knowledge, though their hatred for the vamps remained, and the vamps’ hatred for them was just as intense.
With no place else to go, the vampires remained in the human realm. They’d traveled to Earth before to feed, but it became their home after the witches’ attack.
Lexi had no idea how Sahira’s father managed to sweet talk a witch into his bed, but somehow, he did it. And Sahira was the one who paid the price.
Her mother left after Sahira was born, and she didn’t take her baby with her. Sahira grew up in the human realm with her father and Del, who was only four years older. Del’s mother, a vampire, was killed by a warlock shortly after his birth, and Sahira’s mother was still alive, but she had nothing to do with her.
Ashamed of her weakness at having not only slept with but conceived a child with a vampire, Sahira’s mother left her baby behind so she could return to the witch realm. Sahira rarely mentioned her, but Lexi knew they’d met.
The loss of both their mothers and their close ages bound Sahira and Del together; they grew up as thick as thieves. Their deep loyalty and love for each other continued until the day he died.
Over time, Sahira stopped traveling to the Shadow Realms and remained on Earth. It was easier for her that way. She was as caught in the middle as Lexi, but at least Lexi wasn’t torn between two species who despised each other.
Although, that had probably changed now. Before, the humans had never known she existed. Vampires had always been a thing of legends born from real encounters with vamps, but they were still fantastical and believed to be fake.
Humans knew they were real now, and she doubted that knowledge made them happy. Yes, she was sure the humans probably hated vamps as much as the witches did.
She followed Sahira over to the two overstuffed chairs, but she stopped before taking a seat. She couldn’t spend the next hour staring at the fireplace while knowing what lay beyond it.
“How about we sit outside today?” she suggested. “It’s so nice out.”
Sahira turned back to her and smiled. “That sounds perfect.”
The teacup warmed her hands when she took her cup from Sahira, and the scent of lavender and peppermint wafted to her. Sahira switched the flavor every day, and Lexi was glad she’d chosen these two today as a sense of peace descended over her.
They left the library behind and made their way down the hall before crossing through the sitting room with its delicate antique furniture and a striking grandfather clock in the corner. The pendulum of the clock swayed as it ticked away the seconds.
With its gray stone walls, the room housed furniture mostly done in shades of blue, and sheer blue curtains framed the double doors leading to the patio. They settled into the patio chairs with their thick blue cushions.
Lexi started to rest her cup on the white table when she recalled why they’d stopped coming out here.
“Oh,” she murmured as she stared across the vast, once green lawn that had been bordered by a ten-foot-high privet hedge.
Now, only charred pieces of that once perfectly manicured hedge stood up from the ground. Half the lawn was nothing more than blackened earth.
Beyond the charcoaled remains, humans trudged down what remained of the road. They skirted broken chunks of asphalt as they walked with their shoulders hunched forward and their heads bent against the sun. Dirt streaked their faces and clothes, and many of them looked like they’d crawled out of a coal mine.
These people looked like this because they didn’t have much clothing left and because the dragons destroyed most of their homes. Lexi often felt like she’d lost everything, but she realized how lucky she was.
Despite her losses, she still had much more than so many. She did her best to give what they could, but they didn’t have much to spare. Normally, she didn’t come to this side of the house, but she couldn’t hide from her reality anymore.
It was outside her home, and now, it was also beneath it.
“I saw Malakai,” she said as she sipped her tea.
“Oh,” Sahira said.
Lexi detected the dislike in her voice; Sahira had never been good at hiding it when it came to Malakai.
“He was out in the daytime,” she said.
“That’s not unusual if it’s overcast.”
“It was today.”
Sahira turned toward the clear blue sky and the sun streaming down on them. Like her, Sahira could tolerate the sun because she was only half vampire.
“Ooooh,” Sahira said more slowly.
“He was wearing an amulet.”
Sahira set her cup down with a clatter and spun toward her. She looked like Lexi had told her he was dressed as a scarecrow and reciting the Wizard of Oz.
“Really?” Sahira asked.
“Yes. It was…”
“Red,” they said at the same time.
“You know what it is?” Lexi asked.
“It’s a sun medallion. At one time, there were a lot of them in the vampire realm. They used to mine for them beneath the mountains there. When the witches destroyed their realm and drove the vampires out, most of the medallions were destroyed or lost. The few remaining ones are all held by the Lord of the Shadow Realms.”
“So the Lord gave it to him?”
“Yes.”
“Which means no one would dare try to take it from him.”
“Not unless they want to have the wrath of the Lord unleashed on them.”
Lexi shuddered at the idea of that wrath coming down on her. “Why would the Lord give Malakai an amulet?”
“Malakai must have done something to earn it.”
“I don’t want to know what that was.”
“Neither do I.”
Feeling unsettled by this development, Lexi lifted her cup and sipped her tea as she watched the people on the road.
Cole caught the scent of Orin not far from where he left Lexi. He didn’t say a word to the others, but the other lycan tracked it to a forest where even Cole lost Orin’s trail. From there, they prowled through the woods until they came across a few houses.
They interviewed the occupants of those homes, but no one had seen Orin. From there, they traveled back into the woods until they came to the edge of a lake. The sun reflected off the water’s pristine surface and illuminated the large, gray stone manor across the way.
Malakai stared at the manor while the lycans prowled the water’s edge, and Brokk studied the ground like he was bored with the whole thing. However, the set of Brokk’s jaw and the way his fingers twiddled behind his back indicated Brokk was paying attention to everything.
Cole studied the amulet at Malakai’s throat. The vampire hadn’t possessed the powerful sun medallion while they were fighting together, but there was only one place he could have gotten it.
The vampire’s possession of the medallion made Cole distrust him more. He was acutely aware Malakai would tell the Lord every detail of their time together today.
He glanced at Brokk, but his brother was wandering idly by as he examined the shoreline as if searching for something. Whatever Malakai did to earn that amulet, it had made the Lord extremely happy.
“I’ll be back,” Malakai said.
“Where are you going?” the largest of the lycans demanded.
“I have something to do.”
Malakai walked away, and Cole watched as he strolled around the lake. As his step's pace increased, Cole realized Malakai was nowhere near as nonchalant as he was trying to act. Something about the manor had Malakai excited.
“I’ve had enough of that asshole,” the smallest lycan grumbled.
“Then let’s get out of here. We’re not going to find the dark fae,” another lycan said.
“He’ll report us to the Lord.”
“Report what? That we lost the trail. There’s not much to report there.”
The largest lycan looked at Cole and Brokk, who stared back at them. “I don’t care what you do,” Cole said.
The lycans didn’t say anything before they turned and loped away into the woods.
“Now what?” Brokk asked.
Malakai was almost jogging as he closed in on the manor. “What has him so excited?” he muttered.
“No idea,” Brokk said. “We should try to find Orin.”
“We will, but let’s see what has that asshole in such a rush first.”
Brokk frowned as he gazed after Malakai. “Yes, let’s.”
They started around the lake together.
“What do we do if we find Orin?” Brokk asked as Malakai climbed the steps to the front doors of the manor.
“We’ll get his ass somewhere safe if we can.”
“Can you smell him?” Brokk asked.
“No, I lost his scent soon after they did, but I might be able to pick it up again if we keep searching.”
They were almost around the lake, and the manor doors were still closed when the scent of strawberries hit him. He’d been so focused on trying to find Orin’s scent that he’d shut out all others; now, Lexi’s aroma hit him like a hammer between the eyes.
He suddenly understood why Malakai abruptly left and his obvious rush.
“Shit,” he hissed.
“What?” Brokk inquired.
He didn’t respond as he moved faster than Malakai had toward the home. His heart beat faster with every step as he recalled Malakai’s reaction to Lexi in the Gloaming and the marketplace, and hers to him. It was obvious what Malakai wanted from her and just as obvious the feeling was not mutual.
“What are you doing?” Brokk demanded.
“Stopping that prick of a vampire.”
“How can we make their lives better?” Lexi asked Sahira as she sipped her tea and watched the stragglers.
“The humans?”
“Yes.”
“How can we change what has already happened?”
“We can’t, but there has to be something we can do for them.”
“We’re doing the best we can by giving them food. We’d still offer some of them employment, but most don’t trust us enough to work for us anymore.”
That was true. Only a couple of the people who once worked here were willing to come back, and none of them lived here anymore. Maybe it was because of the war, or maybe it was because they realized they were messed with for years while living in the manor.
For years, Sahira had cast a glamour over the manor and those working in it that made it appear the immortals were aging the same as humans. When the dragons descended on the land, Sahira saw no reason to keep the glamour in place.
Those who saw the truth and realized they’d been tricked were rightfully pissed. Despite the protection the manor offered them, they left. Lexi didn’t blame them, but she missed them.
Before Lexi could say anything more, someone pounded on the front door. The blows echoed throughout the house and rebounded down the hallway. The sudden intrusion of the powerful blows caused Lexi to jump. She cursed as tea splashed over the rim of her cup.
“Who could that be?” Sahira asked as she set her cup down.
Lexi’s pulse pounded in her temples as she recalled the group at the marketplace. The group who had gone off in search of Orin. Sahira had cast protective spells over the tunnels years ago; they shouldn’t be able to detect him down there, but had she missed something else that could have led them here?
Lycans had a really strong sense of smell. Could they have tracked him all the way here? Would they smell him on her?
She’d rushed to clean up his trail; she could have missed something. Or maybe someone had seen her with him. She hadn’t noticed anyone around, but that didn’t mean they weren’t there.
Oh shit.
She tried to control the shaking in her hands as she rose from the chair, but she felt like someone was continuously hitting her with a taser as her heart raced.
Get it together! She gritted her teeth together as she willed herself not to blow it completely. Besides, she didn’t know who was at the door, but she had a sinking suspicion she did.
Throwing her shoulders back, she strode to the front door with a confidence she didn’t feel. Her mouth felt like she’d been chewing on sand as she took one step and then another toward the door… toward her doom.
Sahira’s footsteps sounded behind her as another loud knock rebounded throughout the manor. Lexi stepped into the hall and almost winced at the harsh sound. It took all she had not to turn and run in the opposite direction.
Instead, she wiped her sweaty palms on her jeans and called, “Coming!”
Walking toward the door, she felt as if she were walking toward the death chamber, but she didn’t try to fight her fate. She’d done this to herself. If the consequences of her actions were waiting to drag her away, then so be it.
She told herself this, but inwardly she was screaming that she wasn’t ready to die. She’d prefer not to be dragon chow.
“Do you want me to get it?” Sahira asked from behind her.
“No,” Lexi said.
She stopped in front of the door, took a deep breath, and pulled it open before she chickened out and ran. She plastered a fake smile on, but it faltered when she spotted Malakai on the other side.
Malakai stood with his hand resting on the doorframe as he leaned toward her. Her teeth ground together as her heart thumped out a few extra beats.
“Malakai!” she greeted a little too cheerfully.
She was never outwardly rude to him, but she wasn’t exactly friendly either. She preferred not to encourage his pursuit of her or make him suspicious.
Gathering herself, she compelled herself to relax as she continued. “What brings you by today?”
“Elexiandra,” he drawled in a tone that made her skin crawl. “It’s a pleasure to be blessed with your presence twice in one day.”
Somehow, Lexi managed to keep her smile in place, but she wanted to slam the door in his arrogant face. She didn’t reply as Sahira came to stand beside her.
“Hello, Sahira,” Malakai greeted.
“Malakai,” Sahira replied in a clipped tone.
Malakai didn’t notice the tension in Sahira’s voice as his eyes remained riveted on Lexi. When his gaze ran hungrily over her, Lexi managed to stop herself from crossing her arms over her chest.
Making her uncomfortable was exactly what he meant to do. Instead of cowering, she lifted her chin and met his brown eyes when they finally returned to hers.
“What can I do for you, Malakai?” she demanded.
His smile caused her hands to fist. Malakai believed she would be his, and since her father’s death, she’d believed it too, but no more. She would lose everything before she ever allowed him to claim her as his wife.
Malakai’s smile widened as his hand fell away from the door. If she hadn’t known better, she might suspect he’d read her mind and found it amusing. However, vampires didn’t possess that ability.
“Have you seen a dark fae around here?” he inquired.
“We haven’t seen anyone around here,” Sahira said.
“This one is injured.”
“Which would make him more noticeable.”
Malakai’s eyes narrowed on Sahira, and Lexi almost laughed, but her amusement lodged in her throat when Cole and his brother strode into view.
Can this get any worse?
But even as the thought ran through her mind, excitement hummed across her veins, and a big smile spread across her lips before she could stop it. Seeing her reaction, Malakai stiffened and looked over his shoulder as Cole and Brokk climbed the steps.
They were here, hunting their brother, and she was harboring the fugitive, but she couldn’t find it in her to be frightened when Cole’s Persian blue eyes landed on her. A small smile curved the corner of Cole’s mouth before Malakai stepped in front of him and slammed his palm into the doorframe.
Unprepared for the motion, Lexi couldn’t stop herself from jumping at the sound. Exasperated by his intimidation tactics, she scowled at Malakai as he leaned closer. The malicious gleam in his eyes caused her stomach to roll, but she refused to back down from his intimidation tactics.
“Back off,” Cole said, and clasping Malakai’s shoulder, he pulled him back a step.
For a second, Lexi believed Malakai was going to shove him as they glared at each other. They were two extremely powerful beings, but Malakai had to know he would lose in a fight against Cole.
He didn’t seem aware of this as his hand fisted.
Cole braced himself for Malakai’s attack; he would welcome the chance to beat this asshole into a bloody pulp. Malakai believed that because he worked for the Lord, he could do whatever he wanted. He was in for a rude awakening.
“I said,” Cole bit out, “back off.”
Brokk shifted behind him, but Cole didn’t look at his brother. Brokk wouldn’t interfere unless he believed Cole might lose. There was no chance of that happening.
Malakai’s eyes turned red. “Are you interfering in an investigation that the Lord of the Shadow Realms ordered me to undertake to find your treasonous brother?”
Stepping closer, Cole used his superior size to force Malakai back. “I am interfering in nothing. I’m telling you that harassing the daughter of a man who died for our cause will not be tolerated.”
“I will inform the Lord of your insubordination.”
“Go ahead. You are a lieutenant in his army, and I am a general. You served under me in the war, and we know which of us means more to him. We have helped to track Orin, but his trail has grown cold. It’s time to move on.”
“I’m sure the lycans hunting him with me will disagree with you,” Malakai said.
“Perhaps, but you’ll have to hunt them down to ask them. They left.”
Malakai looked as if Cole had punched him in his too handsome face. “No, they didn’t.”
“They’re gone,” Brokk said. “If I were a betting man, I’d say they’re probably already having a drink somewhere.”
“They didn’t care if you reported them either,” Cole said.
Red crept up Malakai’s neck as he searched for the lycans and found nothing. Cole didn’t know if he was more embarrassed or incensed by this revelation, but he found Malakai’s discomfort amusing.
Cole waited for him to launch a punch, but instead, the vamp turned toward Lexi and gave a small bow. “I will see you soon.”
The shoulder beneath Cole’s hand vanished as Malakai teleported away. Cole’s hand fell to his side, and he turned to find a pale Lexi staring at the spot where Malakai had stood.
Then, her eyes met his and she smiled.
Lexi should politely thank him and make some excuse to retreat. She should be on pins and needles and terrified he’d somehow catch a whiff of his brother, but instead, her heart raced with excitement, and she felt almost giddy with happiness.
“It’s good to see you again today,” he said. “I wish it was under better circumstances.”
“Again today?” Sahira asked, and Lexi managed to stop herself from wincing.
“Yes.” She turned to her aunt. “I ran into Prince Colburn at the marketplace earlier.”
Sahira lifted an elegant brow as she looked between them. “I see.” Then her gaze settled on Cole. “And you’re helping Malakai hunt down your brother?”
She didn’t bother to hide her disapproval over this. No matter what he did, Sahira would have let them draw and quarter her before she ever turned on her brother.
“He is a traitor,” Brokk stated.
Somehow Lexi managed to keep herself from wincing at the callous words. Traitor or not, asshole or not, Orin was still their brother. But they seemed not to see it that way.
She didn’t know what had caused such indifference from them, or maybe she did; she had met Orin after all. She couldn’t imagine what it had been like to live with him for centuries. She wanted to kill him, and she’d only known him for a day.
Despite the fact they’d probably hand her over too if they knew the truth, her smile never wavered. Maybe she was better at this deception stuff than she realized. It was not a discovery she liked about herself.
“Would you like to come in for something to eat or drink?” she asked, and Sahira sniffed disdainfully.
The idea of having them in the manor, above their brother, frightened Lexi, but she wasn’t ready to say goodbye. Besides, etiquette required she didn’t send two princes away without at least offering them something first.
Cole’s eyes flicked to her aunt before returning to her. “Thank you, but we should continue our search.”
She struggled to hide her disappointment. “Oh, yes, of course.”
“I’m sure I’ll see you again soon,” Cole said and gave her a pointed look that caused her toes to curl and a blush to creep up her neck.
He bowed his head to them. “Good day, ladies.”
He turned away, and Brokk duplicated the gesture while murmuring the same words.
Lexi watched them walk away before shutting the door and leaning against it. She closed her eyes as she tried to understand what happened. Malakai was pissed, and he would be back, but she couldn’t bring herself to care as she replayed Cole’s words in her mind.
“I’m sure I’ll see you again soon.”
She was a fool for wanting him to return while his brother remained in her tunnels. However, she hoped she saw him again sooner rather than later. She just hoped it wasn’t anywhere near here.
“You should stay away from that man,” Sahira cautioned. “Anyone who would turn against their brother is someone who would turn on you.”
She opened her eyes to find Sahira studying her with a knowing look. She almost told Sahira she’d turn Orin in too, but there was no way Lexi could explain how she knew him.
“I doubt I’ll be seeing him again,” Lexi said.
“Hmm,” Sahira huffed as she folded her arms across her chest. She looked a lot more skeptical about this than Lexi felt. “With the way he was looking at you, I think he’ll be back, and you should stay away.”
“Sahira—”
“He’s no good, Lexi. You’re also completely different. He’s a seasoned warrior, a prince, and a dark fae. You know what they’re like with men and women.”
She did. She’d heard the stories about the twisted sex fiends the fae could leave in their wake. Heard how they went through sexual partners like most others went through clothes, but she couldn’t bring herself to look at Cole like that.
She was probably a fool for thinking he was different. She was sure plenty of other women probably convinced themselves of the same thing, but she couldn’t believe he was nothing but a callous immortal seeking only one thing from her… and every other woman he met.
“He’s also part lycan,” Lexi said. “They’re known to be notoriously free with their sexuality until they find their mate, and then they never waver from their partner.”
“Lexi—”
“I don’t know why we’re talking about this. Like you said, we’re completely different. He isn’t going to return here.”
The sadness those words evoked surprised her. She shouldn’t want him to return while Orin was here, or even after Orin left, but… but… she did.
“I need a shower,” she muttered.
“Would you like to finish our tea?” Sahira asked.
She was too annoyed for tea right now. Cole might not return, but Malakai would, and she suspected he would make her pay for the embarrassment he experienced today.
“No,” she murmured. “We’ll catch up tomorrow.”
“Okay.”
Lexi started to walk away, but she stopped and turned back to her aunt. “What do you think Malakai is going to do?”
“Nothing, if he knows what’s good for him.”
“That amulet proves he’s close to the Lord. With Father dead, he could make me marry Malakai.”
Sahira’s shoulders went back, and her nostrils flared. “Over my dead body.”
“That’s what I’m afraid of, and we’ve had more than enough dead bodies.”
Some of the fight went out of Sahira. “Your father also fought for the Lord; he wouldn’t throw that away just to please Malakai.”
“My father is dead and can’t do anything for the Lord anymore; Malakai is alive, especially vicious, and obviously close to him. He might not ask the Lord to marry me. He may ask him to give me to him as his concubine so that way, when Malakai finishes with me, he can toss me aside again.”
Sahira opened her mouth to respond, but then she closed it. They stared at each other as her words hung in the air between them. The sad truth was, being used and discarded by him was the better of the two options.
Feeling as if the world rested on her shoulders, Lexi started up the curving stairs toward the second floor.
“Lexi.” She stopped and turned back to Sahira. “We won’t let it happen.”
Lexi didn’t say what they were both thinking; there was nothing they could do to stop it if the Lord decided to do it.
“Your brothers were here earlier,” Lexi said to Orin as she set a basket of bread on the ground.
Judging by the color in his face and the fact he didn’t wince every time he moved, he’d taken some of the potion. Apparently, his concern over being unable to defend himself outweighed his dislike of having to rely on the witches for anything.
“Cole and Brokk?” he asked.
“Do you have any other brothers?” she retorted.
“Yes, but Varo is well hidden. The others are all dead.”
She winced at the reminder his family sustained many losses too, but then, many families lost so much. “I forgot they were dead.”
“Your father is dead too, isn’t he?” Orin asked.
Lexi stared warily at him as she stepped back. “How do you know who my father is?”
“It took me some time to remember, but I’ve seen your manor before. I rode by it once, before the war. It belonged to Delano Harper, and I heard that Del did not survive the war.”
Lexi wiped her suddenly sweaty palms on her jeans. When she gave him her nickname earlier, she hadn’t believed he would figure out who she was, but she’d been foolish to think that.
He would have discovered that once he left here. It’s not like he couldn’t find her manor again, but she still didn’t like him knowing who she was.
“No, he didn’t,” she said.
“You’re Elexiandra Harper.”
“Yes.”
“I’m sorry for your loss.”
Lexi blinked at him. After his words yesterday, she hadn’t expected any sympathy from this callous man.
“Thank you.” Then after a few seconds passed, she said, “I’m sorry for your losses too.”
His black eyes studied her. “Thank you. What did you tell Cole and Brokk?”
“Well, since neither of us is locked up right now, I’d guess I told them that I hadn’t seen you.”
A strand of black hair fell into one of his eyes as he examined her. The movement revealed the ciphers on his neck, but her father’s clothes hid whatever other marks he bore.
“You don’t strike me as a liar, Elexiandra.”
“Normally, I’m not, Orin.”
He lifted a loaf of bread and broke off a piece. “You are now. And you must be a pretty good liar if my brothers believed you.”
When he took a bite of the bread, Lexi contemplated kicking it down his throat. “You don’t know what I’m capable of doing.”
Orin lowered the bread and leaned toward her. “Neither do you.”
Lexi recoiled. “What’s that mean?”
“Only that I don’t think you know what you’re capable of doing. I bet you never considered harboring a war criminal or lying to the side your father fought on. War changes us and makes us do things we never thought we would. It brings out the worst and best in us.”
“The war is over.”
“Now you’re lying to yourself.”
She frowned at him while he ate more of the bread. After a minute, he licked his fingers and looked up at her again.
“The rebels lost the war, but the battle still wages,” he said. “And eventually, you’re going to have to decide what you will and won’t stand for.”
“I can tell you that I won’t stand for an arrogant fae trying to tell me who or what I am.”
His arrogant grin set her teeth on edge. “Obviously, you will, because I’m still here.”
“I didn’t have much choice,” she reminded him through gritted teeth.
“You might be lying to yourself again.”
Having had enough of his crap, Lexi opened the bag hanging from her arm and removed a jug of water. She placed it beside him. Then she took out a couple of flashlights and set them down too.
“I won’t be back for a few days,” she said.
“And why is that?”
“Because I can’t keep taking the risk of being discovered emerging from one of the tunnels. You have enough food and water to last you for a bit, if you don’t waste it.”
“The dark fae must feed in other ways,” he reminded her as his gaze perused her.
“Then you’ll have to leave here soon because I’m not helping you with that.”
She didn’t wait to hear any more of what he had to say before she turned and walked away. She was glad to be away from him and glad she didn’t have to return for a few days, but as she made her way into the darkness, with only a small flashlight to guide her, she couldn’t help pondering his words.
He was right; the rebels had lost the war, but the battle still raged, and she had no idea which side she stood on.
No, that wasn’t true. Her father was loyal to the Lord because he believed that was right, but there was no way he could have foreseen the devastation the Lord would unleash on the mortal realm.
He never would have fought on the Lord’s side if he’d suspected the amount of misery and death the mortals would endure. And she couldn’t be loyal to a man who killed without remorse and slaughtered billions to get his way.
She couldn’t see herself as a rebel either. She wasn’t a fighter, but she couldn’t stand by and do nothing while others suffered. She had no idea what to do or think anymore, other than wanting him off her land.
Lexi tried to figure it all out as she made her way through the tunnels, but by the time she reached the end, she felt as confused as when she started.
She cautiously poked her head out of the opening. Sure she was alone, she slipped out of the tunnel and into the barn. The sounds of the horses munching on their hay and shifting in their stalls greeted her. Inhaling deeply, she allowed the much-loved scent to calm her, but she doubted her calm would last.
Sitting at the table, Cole studied the club as two women danced around his brother. Brokk ran his hand over a dancer’s ass before pulling her onto his lap. The woman squealed as she draped her arms around Brokk’s shoulders.
When another woman approached him, Cole shook his head at her and tensed. Normally, he enjoyed coming here, but tonight, he wanted out of this place.
Unfortunately, Brokk wasn’t interested in leaving.
The woman took a couple more steps toward him, but when Cole’s eyes narrowed on her, she turned to someone else. It had been a few days since he fed, and the dark fae stirred inside him as the scent of sex filled the air, but the idea of touching one of these women repulsed him.
From the corners of the room and the hallways deeper within the building came sounds of ecstasy. This club specialized in making sure men and women got exactly what they desired when they came here.
The workers were trained in the art of sex, and many of them were shadow kissed. Corrupted by the touch of the dark fae, those shadow kissed worked here to satisfy their hunger for more sex. But they would never appease that need.
Over the centuries, he’d left plenty of shadow kissed souls behind him. Some of them probably worked here, but he had no interest in seeing any of them. He stopped having any use for them years ago.
Sitting in the other booths, deep within the shadows of the club, was an assortment of other immortals. The single candle inside the red glass jars on the tables did little to dispel the shadows and helped keep most of the patrons hidden.
And all of those patrons were enjoying the entertainment the men and women working Becca’s club provided. Those immortals had come here for entertainment and sex, while most of the dark fae were here to feed.
They were all happy to be here, but his skin crawled when a dark fae woman walked past him and trailed her fingers across his neck. He ducked away from her touch and growled at her. The woman scampered away.
“Now, now, play nice,” a woman purred from behind him.
The chair beside him pulled back, and Cole met Becca’s gaze as she settled onto it. As she crossed her legs, the slit in her black dress caused it to fall open to her waist. It was obvious she wore no underwear, and just as obvious she wanted him to know it.
The striking beauty of her face was on par with the perfection of her body. The crisscrossing straps making up the top half of her dress only covered the nipples of the lush breasts they pushed up.
“What’s the matter, lover?” she inquired.
“We’re not lovers,” he reminded her. He shifted his attention to Brokk as the woman on his lap laughed. “It’s time to go.”
The woman whimpered her protest and pressed closer to Brokk. Becca leaned toward Cole as Brokk lifted his drink.
“Back off,” Cole warned her, but she didn’t move away.
“What’s the rush?” Brokk asked.
“We came in search of Orin, and he isn’t here,” Cole said.
His words didn’t matter as his brother was distracted by another woman who came up behind him. She’d tipped his head back and had her breasts in his face as she leaned over to kiss him.
Becca tapped her fingers on the table and smiled smugly. “But he was.”
Cole stiffened at her words, and Becca leaned closer to run her fingers over the back of his hand. An involuntary snarl issued from him as he pulled his hand away. He didn’t have time to think about where that snarl came from, but it didn’t faze Becca.
She sat back and ran her fingers across the top of her breasts before tweaking her nipple until it hardened beneath her dress. Her ciphers encircled the backs of her hands and wrists; he knew from experience they were the only ones she possessed or at least the only ones she revealed.
“When was Orin here?” Cole demanded.
Becca lifted a finger and waved it at him as her almond-shaped, black eyes twinkled in amusement. Her black hair, cut into a sleek bob at her chin, shone in the candlelight.
“Not so fast,” she admonished. “You do me, and I’ll do you.”
She repulsed him, but Cole leaned closer and crooked his index finger. When he beckoned to her with it, she leaned so close he could feel her breath against his lips.
“I had enough of doing you months ago,” he told her.
She didn’t react for a second, and then she released a bark of laughter and sat back. “Oh my, someone is feisty tonight.”
Cole didn’t reply as he glanced over at Brokk, who had his tongue shoved down the throat of the fae who stood behind him. The other straddled his lap and ran her fingers down his chest as she undid the buttons on his shirt.
“Brokk!” Cole snapped.
When his younger brother didn’t respond, Cole stretched his leg across the way and kicked his chair back. They broke apart when the chair skidded back a couple of feet.
“What the fuck?” Brokk protested.
Cole glowered at him, and Brokk glared back as the women pouted, and Becca laughed.
“In case you missed it, Becca said Orin was here,” Cole said.
Brokk blinked at him before shifting his attention to Becca. He slapped the ass of the woman straddling him before pushing her away. “Later.”
Both the women moaned a complaint, but they moved away as Brokk focused his attention on Becca. “When was he here?” he demanded.
“Not so fast there, little brother,” Becca said as she waved a finger at him before giving Cole a pointed look. “I don’t give favors without receiving them.”
Brokk glanced at Cole. His brother was aware of Cole’s antipathy toward Becca and of Becca’s determination to claw her way into the role of a dark fae princess.
During their brief time together, Cole learned she was after far more than a fling, and Cole was not looking for a wife. That was something she didn’t want to hear, and she had not taken it well.
To Becca, he was the key to her wearing a crown; because, with him, she could become a queen if something happened to his father. It didn’t matter that Tove wasn’t going anywhere anytime soon; Becca craved the power of the royalty.
She would not get it.
For some reason, she believed he considered her something more than a good fuck. Unfortunately, though he’d walked away, she wasn’t ready to give up. When her fingers brushed his arm again, an image of Lexi rose into his mind. He moved away from her touch.
She was the reason he didn’t want to be here or anywhere near Becca. He already knew who he wanted, and it was not anyone from this place.
“Don’t,” he warned her, and Brokk scooted his chair closer to kick him under the table.
Cole shot him a fulminating look, and Brokk waggled his eyebrows as he nodded toward Becca. “Take one for the team,” Brokk mouthed.
Cole’s hands flexed, and the ciphers on the back of them shifted. Brokk didn’t understand—hell, he didn’t understand, but there was no way he was screwing Becca again.
Last week, despite his abhorrence of Becca, he still would have taken her to bed if it meant discovering what she knew. It had never mattered to him before whether he liked his bed partners or not, and Becca was an expert. She owned this place, she knew what men and women wanted, and she excelled at pleasing her partner.
Her expertise in bed didn’t make up for her conniving personality, which she didn’t hide well.
“I’m not playing your games, Becca. When was Orin here?” he demanded.
She leaned back in her chair and crossed her legs. She kicked one back and forth as she studied him.
“I don’t want you to play a game, Cole. I want you to play with me.”
“That’s not going to happen.” Cole pushed his chair back and rose. “We’ll find Orin on our own.”
He didn’t wait for her reply before he turned and strode through the crowd. Immortal creatures scrambled to get out of his way as he stalked toward the stairs and descended to the packed dance floor.
He shoved his way through the dancers, many of whom were having sex on the floor, pushed open the door, and stepped into the cool night air.
Unlike in the Gloaming, where the air was thick with the scent of crops this time of year, the air on earth was heavy with the smell of burnt wood and scorched earth. The aroma of the war and the destruction and death of this planet hung heavily on the air.
The stench had become all too familiar to him recently. So much so that it no longer repulsed him.
“What was that about?” Brokk demanded as he emerged from the club to stand beside Cole. “We have to discover what she knows about Orin.”
“I don’t care; I’m not fucking her to get the answers.”
“It’s not like you haven’t fucked her for less.”
“Things change.”
Brokk’s aqua eyes studied him. “What is going on with you?”
He wasn’t in the mood to discuss this with Brokk, especially since he didn’t have the answer. “Let’s go.”
Brokk glanced back at the Black Hole Club before falling into step beside Cole. “I was having a good time.”
“Then go back.”
But Cole wasn’t returning. There was somewhere else he’d far prefer to be.
He recalled Lexi, standing in the doorway of her manor, and something inside him twisted. He wanted to return to her, to see her again, and make sure she was safe.
When she’d invited them in earlier, he’d almost accepted, but they’d been so close to Orin, and there was a chance he might still find his trail. He hadn’t, and they’d gone to Becca’s in the hopes of learning more, but he’d turned his back on their one possible lead.
He loved his brother and wanted to find him, but he didn’t regret his decision to leave Becca behind.
“Where are you going?” Brokk demanded as he followed Cole toward the trees.
“I have somewhere to be,” he muttered.
“Care to let me in on this secret destination where you have to be?”
“Del’s manor.”
“Delano Harper’s manor?”
“How many Dels do you know?”
Brokk stopped walking, but Cole didn’t hesitate. He shouldn’t have left her alone earlier, not after the confrontation with Malakai, and now a desperate urge to get back to her compelled him faster.
“Have you lost your mind?” Brokk demanded as he jogged to catch up with him.
Cole wasn’t sure how to respond because he believed he might have lost it a little.
“Is this about his daughter?” Brokk asked.
Cole didn’t answer.
“She’s gorgeous, but Del was our friend,” Brokk said.
Something rippled inside Cole; he didn’t like Brokk talking about her like that. “I know.”
“Then leave his daughter alone.”
“I’m going to make sure she stays safe.”
Brokk grasped his arm and pulled him to a stop. Cole’s hands fisted as he kept his gaze focused on the woods, but his frustration wasn’t for his brother; it was for him.
“She’s young, Cole.”
“I know.”
“Then what are you doing?”
Cole’s head twisted toward him, and whatever Brokk saw there caused him to release Cole’s arm and take a step back.
“Malakai will go back for her,” Cole growled.
“And what do you plan to do about that?”
“I don’t know.”
Cole didn’t look back at Brokk as he continued toward the woods and the broken road on the other side of them. That road would lead to the market where he encountered Lexi earlier, and beyond it was her home.
What was he going to do when he got there? Stand guard outside her manor until Malakai returned?
That wasn’t possible, but the idea of leaving her vulnerable to that asshole caused the wolf inside him to stir. A wolf that only ever stirred around her. When he flexed his hands, claws scraped his palm.
He jerked his hands up and stared at the claws. They weren’t as long as they could be, but he couldn’t recall a time when he’d lost control of himself enough that they’d extended without him doing it on purpose.
The crunch of Brokk’s step caused him to close his hands to hide those claws, but the look on his brother’s face said he wasn’t fast enough.
“What’s going on?” Brokk inquired.
Before Cole could reply, the crunch of an approaching footstep silenced him. He caught the scent of others and turned as five rebel immortals emerged from a copse of burnt-out trees. Their tattered clothing and bruised bodies gave them away before Cole recognized them as traitors.
The two in the lead were lycans, a dark fae followed them, and two vampires were at the back of the pack. The rebels stopped when they spotted Brokk and Cole standing there.
The dark fae took an abrupt step back. Unlike the others, the fae recognized who he’d run across. The vampires and lycans didn’t; large grins spread across their faces, and one of the lycans cracked his knuckles.
Cole’s natural inclination was to draw on his fae powers, but the wolf was itching for a fight. He’d disembowel these fuckers for fun if it meant releasing some of the hostility inside him.
“I’d keep walking, boys,” Brokk warned.
“Good thing we’re not a pussy like you,” one of the lycans spat.
“You’re going to get one chance to walk away,” Brokk said.
“We should go,” the dark fae muttered.
“Fuck you,” one of the vamps retorted.
The dark fae slipped into the shadows and disappeared.
“At least that one’s smart,” Brokk said.
Cole didn’t speak as he studied the lycans and vamps. Like all male lycans, they stood over six feet tall and were broad through the shoulders and chest. A hint of gold shone in their eyes as the possibility of a fight excited them. Cole felt his excitement rising in response.
And then they attacked.
Cole ducked the punch the first lycan threw at him, and when the lumbering beast staggered past him, he clasped his hands together and rammed them into his back. The impact caused something to give way with a crack and knocked the lycan to his knees.
The second lycan charged Brokk, who threw up his hands and hit the lycan with a wave of air. The blast of air lifted the lycan and flung him off his feet. He soared through the air until he hit a tree. The impact shook the tree. The lycan hung there for a few seconds before collapsing onto the ground.
Brokk was starting to go after the lycan when one of the vampires transported and threw himself onto Brokk’s back. Staggered by the impact of the weight, Brokk reeled backward. Reaching over his back, Brokk grasped the vamp’s hair and pulled the creature over his shoulder.
Cole stalked toward the lycan he’d knocked to the ground, but the other vampire transported, and appearing in front of him, the creature grasped Cole’s throat. Throwing his full weight into Cole, the vamp shoved him back. Cole nearly went down but kept himself upright when he planted his back foot and pushed back into the vamp.
When the vamp’s hand clamped down and cut off his air supply, Cole grasped the vamp’s wrist and twisted to the side. Bone gave way with a crack, and he broke the asshole’s hold on him at the same time he swung his head forward.
His forehead smashed off the vamp’s. The creature howled as it reeled back. Blood spilled down the vamp’s forehead and dripped off his nose. When the vamp lifted his head, his once brown eyes were the color of blood.
The vamp vanished as it launched at him again, but suspecting an attack from behind, Cole spun and swung out with his hand. He couldn’t see the vamp, but his claws caught in flesh and tore into muscle.
The vampire materialized a second later. His hands stretched toward Cole, but they froze in midair. Then his hands flew to his sliced-open throat as blood poured forth.
Cole was almost as astonished as the vamp as blood spilled between the vampire’s fingers and splashed onto the ground. He hadn’t realized he’d unleashed some of the lycan within him until his claws tore into the vamp’s throat.
He’d never let the lycan free before, not even during the war. When fighting, he’d always relied more on his dark fae powers, but now he welcomed the rush the release of the lycan gave him.
He smiled as more of the lycan broke free of its cage, and with another slash, he severed the vamp’s head. It thudded when it hit the ground and rolled a few feet away.
He turned toward the lycan he’d knocked to the ground. The beast was already recovering and climbing to his feet when Cole launched himself onto its back, seized its hair, and ripped its head back.
He plunged his claws into its throat and hacked through the thick sinew. Twisting the lycan’s head to the side, he relished the sound of muscle tearing apart as he succeeded in hacking the creature’s head off.
He turned toward Brokk as his brother dispatched the other vamp. Brokk turned toward the lycan he’d flung into the tree. He took a step toward him as the tip of a sword erupted out the front of Brokk’s chest. His brother’s eyes widened as they fell to the blade piercing his heart.
“NO!” Cole bellowed as he released the lycan’s head and shoved its body out of his way.
He didn’t understand what happened until Brokk twisted to the side. The movement revealed the dark fae who slipped away had returned and snuck up behind his brother while Brokk was fighting.
Brokk was reaching for the sword when the fae grinned and ripped the blade free. The rays of the moon shone off the silver blade with its intricate markings. Dismay filled Cole when he realized what the sword was made of…
Fae metal!
The only metal that could kill a fae, and the coward had rammed the blade through Brokk’s heart. It was a lethal wound for a fae.
I’ll rip off his head and shove it down his throat!
But as the thought ran through his mind, Brokk went to his knees.
No! No! No!
He’d lost too many brothers to this war; he would not lose another. He caught Brokk before he fell face-first onto the ground. When the fae lifted the blade to bring it down against Brokk’s back, Cole grasped the sword and held it while supporting his brother.
Brokk’s hot blood soaked his shirt as the sword bit into his flesh and sliced through his muscle until the blade scoured his bone. The fae tried to rip it away, but Cole refused to relinquish the sword as he yanked it forward.
Not expecting the motion, the fae staggered forward with the sword. Cole grabbed the fae by his throat. His claws dug into the creature’s flesh as he tore out his throat and threw it aside.
The fae’s hands flew to what little remained of his throat as his blood drenched Cole and Brokk. Cole lifted his hand and delivered a staggering backhand that knocked the fae’s head to the side and broke his neck.
Paralyzed by the blow, the fae hit the ground as Cole rose with Brokk in his arms. Cole shifted his hold on his brother to pull the sword free of his palm, and twisting the blade, he grasped the hilt and plunged it through the fae’s back and into his heart. Pinned to the ground, the fae’s fingers clawed at the dirt for a few seconds before he went limp.
Cole turned his attention to where he’d last seen the remaining lycan, but the beast was gone. He didn’t have the time to hunt it as Brokk’s body became completely limp against him.
Lifting Brokk into his arms, Cole fled into the night.
The incessant pounding on the door rebounded through the hallway until it became a never-ending crescendo that caused Lexi to bolt awake and propelled her out of bed before she realized she was moving. Flustered, she spun as she tried to get her bearings.
What was going on? Had the war started again?
No, that made no sense. Why would the war be banging on her door? It never had before.
Realizing she wasn’t making any sense to herself, she struggled to rid herself of her sleep and confusion as the banging continued.
Who was trying to bang down her door and why?
She started to run from her room but skidded to a halt when an image of Malakai entered her mind. The idea of him seeing her in her old T-shirt and nothing else propelled her toward her closet. Their door was about to come off its hinges, but if it was him, then he couldn’t see her like this.
She yanked open her closet doors and pulled out her robe. She tugged it on and cinched the belt around her waist before running from her room. From a few doors down and diagonally across the hall, Sahira was exiting her room.
Their eyes met before Lexi ran for the stairs.
“Elexiandra!” Sahira called sharply after her.
When she arrived at the bottom of the stairs, Lexi glanced at her aunt over her shoulder.
“You don’t know who’s on the other side!” Sahira called as she descended the stairs after Lexi.
No, she didn’t, but they were banging so relentlessly that the thick wood door rattled in its frame. There was something desperate in that knock, something that propelled her forward even as dread slid down her spine.
The banging reverberated in her head as her hand fell on the knob and her throat went dry.
“Lexi!” Sahira hissed.
She had no idea who was on the other side, but she had to answer it. Something about the frantic pounding made it impossible to ignore.
After the last time she tried to help someone, she should know better than to do it again. That asshole was still living in her tunnels, but she couldn’t stop herself from opening the door.
She gasped, and her hand flew to her throat when she spotted Cole on the other side. His eyes burned the brilliant silver of a lycan on the verge of transforming. Blood slicked his hair, slid down his face, and coated his hands as he lifted Brokk toward her.
Lexi’s stomach plunged into her toes as she took in Brokk’s bloodstained clothes and the gaping wound in his chest.
“I need help,” Cole said in a gravelly voice distorted by the elongated fangs in his mouth. “I need a witch. He needs a witch.”
Lexi blinked as his words sank in. She turned toward Sahira as her aunt rushed forward and stopped when she saw Brokk’s damaged body.
“Please help him,” Cole said.
The pleading and torment in his voice tugged at Lexi’s heartstrings. She understood his suffering and panic, and she would do whatever she could to help… even if it bit her in the ass again.
“This way,” Lexi said. “Hurry.” She pushed past her aunt. “Sahira, get whatever you’ll need to help him.”
Her aunt closed her mouth, but her eyes remained wide as she glanced from Lexi to Cole and finally to Brokk.
“Lexi—”
“Close the door and gather your supplies,” Lexi said more sharply than she intended, but she could feel time running out, and she couldn’t deal with her aunt’s overprotective nature now.
Sahira took a deep breath before her shoulders went back, and she shut the door. Lexi was aware she might be getting herself into more trouble —she had no idea what happened to them or if their enemies might come knocking on her door—but she couldn’t turn them away.
She couldn’t turn Cole away even if she harbored his other brother beneath her home.
Cole’s feet thudded on the steps as he followed her upstairs. At the top of the steps, she threw open the first guest room door she came to and rushed inside. She flipped on the light switch, and a dim glow filled the room. The electricity was powered down again, but at least it was working.
When they lost most of their workers, she and Sahira closed off all the unused rooms.
Now, she yanked the dust cover from the bed and the table beside it. She balled the covers up and shoved them into a corner as Cole carefully set Brokk on the bed.
When his head flopped to the side, Lexi held her breath while she waited for some sign he was alive, but he didn’t move. Just as she was beginning to think it was already too late, she caught the subtle rise and fall of his chest.
The air rushed out of her burning lungs, and she lifted her gaze to Cole. Anguish burned in his eyes and etched the lines of his face as he clasped his brother’s hand. She wanted to assure him it would be okay, but the words froze in her throat.
She couldn’t bring herself to lie to him by promising something that might not be true. Sahira was a talented witch, but she couldn’t perform miracles.
The clatter of bottles drew her attention to the doorway a second before Sahira rushed into the room with a tray full of supplies. She set the tray on the table Lexi had cleared.
“What was he stabbed with?” she asked.
“A fae sword,” Cole said.
“A fae sword?”
“Yes.”
“Made of fae metal?”
“Yes.”
Sahira’s eyes flew back to Brokk as Lexi’s hand went to her mouth. How is he still alive?
“Was it wielded by a fae?” Sahira asked.
“Yes,” Cole said flatly.
“Shit,” Sahira whispered.
That word summed it up. Fae metal through the heart was the only thing that could kill a fae, besides decapitation, yet as she watched, Brokk’s chest rose and fell once more.
The fae forged metal was the strongest in all the realms and a powerful weapon against their enemies, but they didn’t use it against each other. Apparently, that was no longer the case.
Lexi gulped at this insight into how far the two sides had devolved into their hatred of each other. If a fae had used a fae weapon against one of their kind, then all bets were off.
“So, the only reason he’s still alive is because he’s half vampire,” Sahira said.
“Yes,” Cole agreed.
Lexi’s hand fell from her throat. “I’ll get some blood.”
She turned and ran from the room. She took the stairs two at a time to the entranceway and sprinted past the stairs to the kitchen. Flinging open the doors of the fridge, she shoved aside the meager contents to grab a couple of bags of blood tucked into the back corner.
She closed the doors and ran upstairs. When she returned to the room, she discovered Cole sitting on the side of the bed. His hand rested on Brokk’s back as he propped his brother up so Sahira could pour a vial of green liquid into his mouth.
Lexi caught the scent of apples and pixie dust, but she had no idea what else was in the vial. She set the blood on the table before going to retrieve towels and water.
“You’re injured,” Lexi said.
When Cole looked up from where he sat at Brokk’s side, Lexi gestured to his hand. It had stopped bleeding, but dried blood coated it, and when he turned his hand over, she saw the ragged edges of a raw gash.
Sahira looked up from where she was applying a healing salve onto Brokk’s chest. Her hands stilled as she glanced between the two of them while Cole stared at his hand. Lexi marveled at the size of that hand as he flexed his fingers.
“It’s healing,” he said and lowered it.
“We should still clean it,” Lexi said.
His gaze returned to his brother before shifting to Sahira as she rose away from Brokk. “I’ll take care of it,” she offered.
“It’s fine. Though, I should probably clean up.” Cole glanced around him and rose from the bed. “We got blood all over your things.”
“It’s fine,” Lexi assured him.
“I’ll replace them.”
“Don’t worry about it. I’ll show you to a bathroom and try to find you some clothes.”
“I can—” Sahira started at the same time Cole said, “Thank you.”
Lexi ignored her aunt’s irritated gaze as she moved toward the door. She felt Sahira’s eyes burning into her with every step, but she didn’t look back as she led Cole from the room and down the hall to one of the guest bathrooms.
She flicked on the light and hurried inside to remove the dust cloths from the vanity and toilet. She shoved them into the closet and pulled out a few towels that she set next to the sink.
“Thank you,” he murmured.
His skin remained paler than normal, and his eyes were dull when they met hers. Then his brow furrowed as his gaze latched onto her, and the silver bled out of his eyes. Lexi marveled over the abrupt change as they resumed their vivid blue color.
There was so much in those eyes, but also something raw and primitive, something far more lycan than fae, and something that wanted her.
That knowledge should terrify her; instead, she thrilled at it.
Cole started to reach for her when he recalled the blood staining his hands. He dug his nails into his palms as he lowered his hand.
He couldn’t touch her with blood on his hands, but the scent of her and the beauty of her hunter green eyes were difficult to resist. A clatter from Brokk’s room drew his attention, and he stepped away from her.
“I’ll be right out,” he said.
He entered the bathroom and closed the door. When he stepped in front of the mirror, his heart sank when he saw the amount of blood coating him. She never should have seen him like this.
He also realized washing his hands wouldn’t suffice though he scrubbed them before turning on the shower. A knock sounded on the door, and he opened it to discover Lexi standing there with an armful of clothes.
“My dad wasn’t as tall as you, but I found some of his biggest clothes. Hopefully, they’ll fit,” she said.
There was something sad and wistful about her as she held the clothes out to him. She misses him.
The thought struck him hard, as did the impulse to cup her cheek to offer comfort. He wasn’t one for comforting or for noticing others' feelings, but with her, things were different.
She was different. He had no idea why, but she was.
“Thank you,” he said as he took the clothes from her. “Your father was my friend and a good man. I miss him too.”
Her luscious mouth parted, and his gaze fell to those ripe lips as Sahira called to her.
“I hope they fit,” she whispered before rushing off to see the witch.
Cole closed the door, stripped out of his ruined clothes, and stepped beneath the hot spray of water. He watched the blood swirl down the drain until the water ran clear. He turned off the shower, dried himself, and dressed.
The jeans were too short on him and rose above his ankles. They were also a little too tight around the waist, but they fit well enough. The shirt pulled taut across his shoulders, and he might tear it if he moved his arms too fast.
When he opened the door, he discovered Lexi with her hand raised to knock.
“Oh,” she said, and her hand fell back to her side. “I thought you might need this.”
She held up a bottle of Sahira’s salve, and as he reached for the bottle with his good hand, her strawberry scent engulfed him. It was a scent he would never forget.
“I’ll do it for you if you’d like,” she offered.
The idea of her touching him was too enticing to resist. “Yes,” he said.
When he stepped aside, she pushed past him with far more authority than her slender frame and height would have conveyed. He almost smiled but stopped when he spotted Sahira studying him from Brokk’s doorway with blatant disapproval.
“How is he?” Cole inquired.
“He’ll survive,” Sahira said.
Some of Cole’s tension eased. “Thank you.”
Sahira’s eyes went past him, but before she could say anything more, he stepped into the bathroom and closed the door. He understood Sahira’s disapproval; she didn’t think he was good for her niece, and she was probably right, but he didn’t give a shit.
He’d never denied himself something he wanted before, and he wasn’t about to start now.
When he turned, he discovered Lexi standing by the sink with her head bent as she uncapped the bottle of salve. The aroma of herbs and spices filled the air, but they were so varied he couldn’t name any of them.
She turned toward him. “Come here,” she said.
With pleasure. But he kept that to himself as he walked over to stand across from her.
“Let me see your hand,” she said.
He liked this bossy side of her and smiled as he extended his hand. She grasped it tenderly and drew it toward her. When she poured some salve onto his palm and gently massaged it into the wound, all his amusement vanished.
Her touch caused his cock to harden as he imagined those slender fingers working their magic over his shaft. Her long lashes curled upward as she worked with a tenderness he’d never experienced from another before.
“What happened out there?” she asked.
“We ran into a group of rebels who weren’t happy to see us,” he said gruffly. “The dark fae left but returned to ambush Brokk.”
“I’m sorry,” she whispered.
The lycan part of him, a part so close to the edge all night, surged to the forefront. Unable to resist touching her anymore, he cupped her cheek and savored the warmth of her silken skin against his palm.
Her fingers stilled, and her breath caught. For a minute, she didn’t move, and then her face tilted up, and her eyes met his. The freckles dotting the bridge of her nose were more visible in the light shining down on her.
She was so beautiful it was like a punch to the gut when those hunter green eyes, with their flecks of emerald, met his. Men would kill to possess her, and he would kill them to make sure she stayed safe.
His need to keep her safe increased as her breath warmed his thumb. His gaze fell to her mouth, and he ran his thumb over her pouty bottom lip.
She was a temptation more alluring than any siren, and he’d encountered a few sirens before. He’d resisted them; he couldn’t resist her.
Her warm breath tickled his thumb before he bent his head and replaced his thumb with his mouth. He braced himself for her to push him away, but she remained unmoving with her back against the sink as her fingers clenched his palm.
When she didn’t push him away, he ran his tongue across her lips and nearly groaned at the honey and strawberries taste of her. He could spend hours, days, years, kissing her, and he would never grow tired of the taste or the sensation of her lips yielding to his.
The lycan part of him broke free completely, and he completely forgot he was half dark fae as the wolf inside took control. His fangs extended, his claws lengthened, and a tingle raced up his spine as the transformation threatened to take over.
No! Not in front of her. Not like this.
He couldn’t recall a time when he’d lost such complete control of himself, because it had never happened. In all of his six hundred and seventy-two years, he’d never been on the verge of transforming without willing it to happen.
Then her mouth parted and her tongue met his. At first, it was hesitant and uncertain, but the longer they kissed, the bolder she became until she met each of his thrusts. He slid his hand into her hair and cupped the back of her head as he deepened the kiss.
He lost himself to the wonder of her as her fingers encircled his wrists. Cole had kissed more women than he could count over his lifetime, and he couldn’t recall a single one of them, but he would never forget her.
His hand fell to her waist and slid beneath her robe. The thin material of her shirt pressed against his palm as he gripped her hip. He drew her flush against him, letting her feel his rigid dick.
He released her hip to grip her ass and lifted her so she sat on the counter. Her shirt bunched in his hand, and he growled as he stroked her hip before squeezing it.
Lexi’s head spun as Cole’s scent and the feel of his body bombarded all her senses. She stopped feeling the cool counter beneath her ass and stopped hearing the rapid beat of her heart as everything in her became focused on him.
Beneath her palms, the corded muscles of his biceps bunched and flexed as the vast amount of power thrumming through him vibrated against her. That power prickled her skin and made her pulse race. The scruff of his beard tickled her face, but she welcomed the delicious sensation.
She’d been around many powerful beings in her lifetime, but she’d never touched one like this before. And she’d never been kissed like this before. His kiss demanded more, and she willingly gave it.
Every thrust of his tongue, every touch of his hand, was designed to make her crave more, and it worked. She hadn’t known it was possible to feel so destroyed yet so found by a kiss.
It felt as if he was breaking every part of her down to the most basic element and recrafting it into something else, something made entirely for him. Was this what it meant to be shadow kissed?
But no, despite the name, she knew someone had to offer up a lot more than a kiss for that kind of complete possession to occur. Still, he was changing her on a fundamental level that left her shaken and alive in a way she’d never been before.
She couldn’t get enough of him.
Her hands slid under his arms and pressed against his back. She tried to draw him closer even as his arms crushed her against him. His hand entwined in her hair and pulled her head back to give him better access to her mouth.
This was going too fast. She’d never been touched in such intimate, knowing ways before, and she had to slow down. He was a dark fae, if she didn’t get control of this, she might never regain control, but her body completely disagreed with the rationale of her brain.
She jumped when a booming knock on the door reverberated throughout the bathroom. When she tore her mouth away, his forehead fell to rest against her temple as his hands possessively gripped her ass.
“Lexi!” Sahira called. “Is everything okay in there?”
Lexi’s chest heaved as she labored to catch her breath. She tried to wiggle away from Cole, but his arms remained locked around her, and the sound he emitted froze her. When he lifted his head and their gazes met, she blinked at the sight of the pure silver eyes staring back at her.
She’d never seen a lycan on the verge of losing control. However, those silver eyes were a clear indication the beast was close to the surface. It should terrify her, as an out-of-control lycan was one of the deadliest creatures in all the realms, but she couldn’t feel any trepidation with his arms locked securely around her.
For the first time, she felt his claws against her ass and saw the faint hint of a cipher at his temple. The outline of his fangs was visible against his closed lips.
If she wasn’t mistaken, he was on the verge of transforming. But as she stared at him, the cipher vanished, and his claws retracted.
She wondered how many ciphers he truly possessed. Immortals whispered that the dark fae hid some of their ciphers from the outside world. The more ciphers a fae had, the stronger they were, but many claimed they only revealed a small percentage of those ciphers to the world so they could conceal the true depth of their power from their enemies.
It made sense to her, but this was the first time she’d seen evidence of it. The emergence of that cipher was as much a sign of his loss of control as his silver eyes.
When his erection pressed between her thighs, she resisted rubbing against him. For a minute, they simply stared at each other. Then her gaze fell to his mouth, and yearning tore through her.
“Lexi!” Sahira called, and a note of panic tinged her voice.
Struggling to breathe, she stammered out a reply. “I’m fi-fine! I’ll be right out.”
His arms squeezed her, and she sensed his irritation as Sahira sighed. Then her aunt’s footsteps sounded against the rug as she strode away
She waited for him to release her, but he remained towering over her with his body locked possessively around hers.
“I should….” Lexi swallowed the lump in her throat. “I should go.”
A muscle twitched in his jaw, but finally, and with a reluctance evident in his slow movements, he released her and stepped away. Lexi tugged her robe close around her as she wiggled off the countertop.
She resisted the blush creeping up her neck and into her cheeks, but it was a losing battle. With her cheeks burning, she finished tugging her clothes into place.
“I must admit, you are a bit irresistible in this,” he murmured.
When he gripped the lapel of her robe and his fingers played with the material, Lexi frowned. She didn’t own anything she would consider irresistible. She glanced down at the pink fabric, and her eyes widened when she spotted the tiny bunnies on it.
With her face burning hotter, she closed her eyes. In her rush to grab clothes from the closet, she hadn’t snagged her new, white, fluffy robe. Instead, she’d taken the robe she’d practically worn threadbare as a kid.
Unwilling to part with it, she stashed it in her closet when she outgrew it at twelve. And now she was wearing it in front of him.
“I was in a rush,” she muttered. “Someone woke me in the middle of the night.”
His burst of laughter caused her eyes to blink in surprise. The sound rumbling from him made her toes curl as much as his passionate kiss. It was such a vibrant, warm sound, so much like the man who issued it.
He was still laughing when his head lowered. His eyes were that piercing blue again when they met hers.
Lexi bit her lip as she gazed at him. He was gorgeous, and she longed to run her fingers over the angles of his face before entwining them in his hair and kissing him again. But if she kissed him again, she wouldn’t stop, and she was not prepared for where it would all lead.
“It’s adorable,” he said before releasing the robe. “I should return to Brokk.”
“Yes, of course.”
She started to edge away from him, but his hand on her face stopped her. He wiped something from her cheek. When his hand moved away from her, she realized it was some of the salve she’d put on his palm.
“Your hand—” she started.
“It’s fine,” he assured her as he held it up between them.
Some of the salve remained on his palm. Beneath it, she saw the healing edges of the deep gash in his hand. “What caused it?”
“I grabbed the blade.”
Her eyebrows rose at this statement. She couldn’t imagine doing such a thing, let alone the agony accompanying it, but it didn’t seem to affect him.
“Until later,” he murmured as he clasped her chin and kissed her once more.
Before she could melt into his kiss again, he broke it off, opened the door, and left the room. She gazed after his back as she pondered his parting words.
What exactly did they mean? Would they continue what they’d started later, or was it just a parting comment?
An uneasy feeling grew in the pit of her stomach as she lifted her trembling fingers to her swollen lips.
Now that the confusion and chaos of the night was settling down, she recalled his brother—a traitor that Brokk and Cole were hunting earlier—was hidden beneath her manor.
The heat Cole’s kiss evoked vanished as her blood ran cold.
Lexi nudged the cracked door further open. She poked her head inside the room where she last saw Brokk and Cole to discover Brokk sleeping soundly on the bed and Cole asleep in the chair beside him.
A twinge tugged at her heart as she gazed at Cole’s large frame in that chair. He’d stretched his long legs before him, and his head had fallen back. He must have been extremely uncomfortable, but that chair was where she last saw him, and she assumed he stayed in it all night.
She eased the door closed and retreated before rushing down the stairs. She strode down the hall and through the kitchen to the mudroom, where she kept her stable clothes. Removing her sneakers from beneath the row of coats hanging on the wall, she tugged them on.
The sun was beginning to break the horizon as she stepped outside. A low mist covered the open field and danced across the ground as she strode toward the barn. The dew-covered grass dampened her sneakers and the bottom of her jeans as she walked.
Beneath the smoky scent always lingering in the air was the sweet aroma of spring and flowers as the robins sang. She stopped outside the barn door and slid it open.
At one time, she came to the stables to help because it was something she loved doing. Now, with most of their staff having fled, she came because she had to care for the animals.
She smiled when the nicker of the horses greeted her and they kneed their doors impatiently. As she made her way down the shedrow, she hung their food tubs over the four horses' doors before going to let out the goats and chickens.
Normally, this was her favorite time of day, and she loved this private time as she listened to the sounds of the animals eating. Today, she didn’t find any solace in the work as her mind spun over the predicament she found herself in.
She wished she could get Orin out of her tunnels, but she didn’t know how to do it without causing a scene that would get her thrown in jail before her beheading. Maybe, if she could talk to him and tell him what happened with his brothers, he would agree to leave, but she couldn’t risk going to see him again while Brokk and Cole were here.
Sahira’s spell kept the tunnels enshrouded in safety, but she couldn’t risk coming back smelling like Orin or getting caught emerging from the tunnels. She had no way to explain either of those things away.
The sun had risen higher in the sky by the time she finished turning out the horses, cleaning their stalls, and setting their feed up for tonight and tomorrow. She left the barn and trudged back across the lawn to the manor.
As the day progressed, the road was filling with humans and immortals starting their day. Most of them walked with their shoulders hunched up and their heads bowed, but some strode purposely forward with the confident swagger of the oppressors savoring their destruction.
Anger and sadness coiled inside her as she watched the downtrodden pass. This was not the way it was supposed to be. This was not what her father had in mind when he fought in the war, or at least that’s what she told herself.
No matter what side he chose, she couldn’t believe this was the outcome her father sought. He had his faults, she would never deny that, but he was a good man at heart. He’d believed he was doing the right thing when he joined the Lord’s side.
There was no way he could have foreseen this outcome, and there was no way he would have approved of it.
Her gaze traveled back to the manor. How did Cole feel about all of this?
He’d fought on the Lord’s side and was hunting his brother, yet he didn’t relish the battering the human race had taken like Malakai did.
But maybe he did. She had no idea what he did and didn’t enjoy. She knew so little about him, after all.
Her fingers involuntarily rose to her lips as she recalled their kiss. Still completely wired from it, she barely slept last night, but there was a good possibility it meant nothing to him.
He was far older than her and part dark fae. They fed on sexual energy as well as food, which meant he’d experienced countless kisses before.
He’d probably forgotten about kissing her by the time he returned to Brokk’s side, but she couldn’t help speculating if it might have meant something more to him.
She dropped her hand and shook her head to clear it of the memories of that kiss. She had enough to contend with without daydreaming about things that could never be.
She trudged back to the manor, entered, and closed the door behind her. She kicked off her sneakers before returning to her room. Some of the tension eased from her as she took in the familiar comfort of her surroundings.
This had been her room since she was a baby. Her nursery's pink walls were replaced by her childhood's purple walls, which became the color-splashed walls of her teens, and were now the dove-gray walls of her twenties.
Photos of her, Sahira, and her father hung around the room. In one, she was sitting on her dad’s lap next to the lake. They were both smiling as their heads leaned against each other. Looks of love and serenity lit their faces.
She recalled the night the photo was taken. Only six at the time, she’d walked to the lake while holding her dad’s hand. They spent some time looking at the stars while he pointed out the constellations. Later, she learned he made most of them up, but she’d marveled over them as the crickets and tree frogs sang their songs.
When they arrived at the lake, the moon was high in the sky. He pulled out a loaf of bread, and she sat in his lap. He regaled her with stories as the ducks, woken from slumber by the prospect of food, swam over to them.
Sahira snapped the photo after all the bread was gone, and Lexi’s head was resting against his chest. She recalled his heartbeat beneath her ear as he held her. She’d drifted off, secure in the knowledge he would always protect her.
He’d seemed indestructible to her, but she’d been wrong. Her hero had fallen on a battlefield, and she had only memories and photos left of him.
With tears clogging her eyes, she turned away from the photo. She tugged off her barn clothes and tossed them into the hamper tucked inside her walk-in closet. One side of the closet contained some of the fancier clothes she wore to the few “special” events she attended in her life, but it was mostly full of jeans, sweaters, and hoodies.
She did have a collection of shoes she loved. Unfortunately, she didn’t wear them often as sneakers and boots were her main source of footwear for work around the manor. But occasionally, she would take them out, put them on, and admire them before slipping them away again.
Gathering some new clothes, she left the closet behind and set the clothes on the pale, yellow comforter covering her queen-size bed. She flicked on the bathroom light switch, but nothing came on.
Lexi lifted the flashlight from where she left it on the counter and turned it on. Hopefully, there was still enough hot water in the tank to get her through a shower, but it wouldn’t be her first cold shower if there wasn’t.
Remodeled when she was fifteen, the bathroom held the claw-foot tub she insisted on having. There was also a stand-in shower with a glass door.
The beige walls were simple and unadorned, but the shelves lining them held various bottles of some of Sahira’s concoctions. Lexi pulled down a lavender mix she loved before stepping into the shower.
She’d been looking forward to a hot shower, but the lukewarm water didn’t last long enough for that to happen. In the hopes of calming her nerves, she rubbed the lavender over her skin and washed it away before fleeing the cooling water.
Wrapping a towel around herself, she left the bathroom and dressed in a pair of jeans, a loose-fitting T-shirt, and her socks. She stood in front of her bureau’s mirror, brushed her hair, and slid an elastic onto her wrist to use later.
When she finished, she left her room and walked down the hall to where Brokk was resting.
She contemplated knocking on the door to see if they needed anything, but she didn’t want to wake Brokk. He’d been on the verge of death last night and required his rest, so did Cole.
She descended the stairs and strode down the hall toward the kitchen. She stepped into the large, airy room with its gray stone back wall. The rest of the walls had been drywalled over and painted a cranberry color.
To her left was a large window overlooking the barn and paddock. Beneath the window was a basin sink. Sahira stood at the stove at the far end of the large island in the room's center. Thankfully, the gas continued to work when the power was out.
Her aunt was chopping herbs on a cutting block she’d set out on top of the black marble countertops. Whatever she was cooking made Lexi’s stomach rumble. However, judging by the vials surrounding Sahira, she wasn’t making breakfast. She was replenishing her potions.
Shade, Sahira’s black cat and familiar, sat beside the cutting board and watched as Sahira’s fingers worked their magic. Shade’s tail swung back and forth as he meticulously cleaned his paw. He paused in the middle of his grooming to study Lexi with his golden eyes before resuming his cleaning.
Sahira absently rested her hand on Shade’s head, and their eyes met before they resumed their activities. Lexi lifted a piece of bread from the counter before pouring some blood into a mug.
“How’s the patient?” Lexi asked.
“When I looked in on him an hour ago, he was doing much better,” Sahira replied. “He’s still sleeping, but he’s healing.”
“That’s good. Was Cole awake?”
Sahira set her spoon down with a loud clatter. “No.”
“Good.”
“He’s dark fae.”
“I know.”
She also knew what that meant. Everyone knew the dark fae were lethal and cold. They also only had one use for someone of the opposite sex… to feed on the energy they emitted during sex.
But Cole wasn’t entirely dark fae. When she first met him, all she’d seen of him was fae, but last night she glimpsed far more lycan in him. And the lycan were known for their undying loyalty to their mate. They also played the field a lot until they found their mate.
And while Lexi didn’t think she was his mate—that was not what she wanted in her life at all—she didn’t think he was like the other dark fae. Not entirely, at least.
Would he break her heart if she wasn’t careful? Absolutely.
But she didn’t plan on letting him get close enough for that to happen. However, she wouldn’t mind if he got as close as he did last night again.
You don’t want to become shadow kissed.
She shuddered at the possibility of becoming one of those mindless, sex-starved things the dark fae sometimes left behind. No, she did not want to become one of them, but for that to happen, she was pretty sure a lot more than what passed between them last night would have to occur, and she had no plans for that.
She felt Sahira’s gaze as she slathered butter on her bread, but Lexi didn’t look at her aunt as she tried to act completely nonchalant.
“I’ll be in the library reading,” she said as she lifted her mug and her plate.
“Hmm,” Sahira grunted.
Lexi strolled over to kiss her cheek. “You worry too much.”
“I always worry about you.”
Lexi squeezed her shoulder before releasing her and strolling toward the door. “I love you too.”
Following the scent of whatever was cooking, Cole descended a set of backstairs and entered a large, airy kitchen. With her back to him, Sahira stood at the island in the center. Her fingers flew as she chopped something with easy precision.
Though she remained focused on whatever she diced, the slight stiffening of her shoulders told him she was aware he’d arrived. His feet didn’t make a sound as he strode across the kitchen toward her.
She didn’t turn to look at him as he approached. “Can I get you something to eat, Colburn?”
He stopped at the countertop and, sniffing the air, caught the faint hint of Lexi. She’d been here recently.
“No,” he said. “And call me Cole. You helped save my brother’s life.”
Sahira didn’t look up at him while she worked, but her jaw clenched a little.
“Where is Lexi?” he asked.
Her fingers stopped, and the thud of the knife ceased against the wooden board. Her head remained bowed for a second before she lifted it and met his gaze. Strands of her mahogany hair had slipped loose of her bun to frame her face. Her amber eyes narrowed on him.
“Stay away from her,” Sahira said.
Cole almost chuckled in amusement, but there wasn’t anything funny about this. Sahira played a large role in Lexi’s life, and she didn’t like him. Because of that, she would do everything she could to drive him away.
However, after the taste he got of Lexi last night, he wasn’t going anywhere. He rested his hand near the stainless steel cooktop with its black, iron burners.
“And why would I do that?” he asked.
“Because she deserves better.”
“Better than me?”
“Better than being messed with by a dark fae.”
Perhaps that was true, but he didn’t care. “You don’t like the dark fae.”
Sahira tossed a handful of herbs into the large pot on the stove. “No one likes the dark fae, Colburn.”
He lifted an eyebrow at her pointed use of his full name. She was a brazen little witch. So that’s where we stand.
“I could say the same about witches and vampires, Sahira.”
She scowled at him while she stirred the pot.
“I could say the same about lycan and humans,” he continued.
“She deserves better than to be messed with by a man who is only looking for one thing. She’s better than that. She’s better than you.”
Again, maybe that was true, but it wasn’t going to stop him. He wanted Lexi, and he would have her. The only one who could prevent it from happening was Lexi. After last night, he didn’t see that happening.
He leaned closer to her. “And how do you know what I’m looking for?”
“Because it’s what all dark fae are looking for. You have to feed, and you need victims to quell your hunger.”
“I can assure you, Sahira, there are no victims in my past. They were all willing.”
“Did they all know what you are?”
He held her fiery gaze as she stopped stirring the pot. His hand flexed on the countertop as his claws lengthened before retracting again. She wasn’t a threat to his safety, but she was a threat if she tried to stand between him and Lexi.
“You know that’s not the way immortals work,” he said. “Or at least it’s not the way we worked before the war. Humans were never supposed to know about our existence, but since you’re so curious about my sex life, I can assure you that since they learned of us, they’ve always known whose bed they’ve climbed into. For some, their curiosity has only increased their desire for immortals and especially the dark fae.”
“Good for you,” she muttered sarcastically.
A vein in Cole’s temple throbbed. “And has everyone in your past always known what you are?”
“There’s a big difference between us; I don’t feed on others.”
“We all do what is necessary to survive. You are part vampire; you require blood.”
“I use blood bags.”
“Good for you.”
“And is it necessary for you to leave the broken, twisted souls of the shadow kissed in your wake?”
“Anything I’ve ever done to anyone, they’ve asked for. No,” he said as he leaned closer, “they begged me for it.”
Waves of dislike emanated from her. He smiled in return.
“Where is Lexi?” he asked.
“She’s young, and she just lost her father. She deserves better than to have someone like you playing with her.”
“You have no idea what I’m like,” he said.
“Everyone knows what the dark fae are like.”
“And what are the witches like? Or the vampires? You’re condemning the dark fae when all immortals have questionable traits. A witch’s temper is legendary.”
Sahira pulled the wooden spoon from the pot and slammed it on the counter. The flames beneath the pot rose as her temper flared. Lifting his hand, Cole moved it toward the fire and closed his fingers. The fire went out.
“You’re not the only one who can control the elements,” he reminded her though the dark fae were stronger and better at controlling the elements than the witches.
The fire surged back to life and wrapped around the corners of the pot. “I am the only one who can cast a hex.”
“Are you threatening me?” Cole growled.
He didn’t want to upset Lexi by hurting this woman, but he wouldn’t tolerate threats from anyone. She had no idea what she was playing with right now. He didn’t know what she was playing with right now. He barely recognized himself since Lexi entered his life.
“I’m telling you,” Sahira hissed. “Leave her alone. She is one of the kindest souls I’ve ever known, and she deserves the best.”
Cole straightened away to study her angry countenance. She’s a mama bear protecting her young.
Sahira wouldn’t be a hindrance to Lexi because she disliked him; she would be a problem because she loved Lexi.
“Now on that, we can agree,” he said.
She blinked at him, and some of the anger went out of her, but her stance remained rigid. He turned away before their antagonism toward each other became something worse. He’d find Lexi on his own.
He started for the doorway but stopped when she called his name. He turned back to find her stirring the pot once more.
“I don’t care that you’re the prince of the dark fae; if you hurt her, I’ll find a way to make you pay,” she vowed.
He laughed as he walked out of the room. He had no doubt she would do everything she could to keep Lexi safe, but he wasn’t afraid of her.
He wasn’t going to fight with her either. Sahira could succeed in pushing Lexi away from him, and he wouldn’t let that happen.
He strode down the hallway toward the front door. As he walked, the scent of Lexi drew him to a set of open, double doors. Inside the room, he spotted Lexi curled up on the cushion of an oversized, brown chair.
She sat with her legs beneath her and her chin on her palm as she held a book. The sun shining through the floor-to-ceiling windows on one side of the room cascaded over her. Its glow brought out the deeper shades of red in her auburn hair.
Feeling like someone had socked him in the stomach, he stood in the doorway and drank in her beauty. He’d never seen anyone as lovely as her. It was more than the perfection of her face; it was also the soul Sahira mentioned. Its warmth radiated from her.
Stepping out of the doorway, he strolled toward her. He crossed the Oriental rug to settle in the chair a few feet away from her. She was so engrossed in her book she didn’t realize he was there until he cleared his throat.
Lexi squeaked and almost threw her book when a sound came from only a few feet away from her. Her head shot up, and she spotted Cole sitting in the other chair and grinning at her like the Cheshire cat.
That smile and the carefree way he draped his arm over the back of the chair as he turned toward her caused the rapid beat of her heart to shift from alarm to excitement.
“I didn’t hear you enter,” she said.
“I know.”
It wasn’t fair he looked casual and carefree while she felt so thrown off by his sudden presence.
“What are you reading?” he inquired.
Lifting the book, she turned it toward him so he could see the name on the cover. When she entered earlier, she’d sought escape, so she chose one of her favorites.
His smile grew. “Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone.”
“Have you read it?” she asked.
“No.”
“It’s really good. The series is one of my favorites.”
His gaze wandered over all the books before settling on her again. “Do you mind if I pick something to read?”
“Not at all.”
She couldn’t help but marvel over his size as he unfolded himself from the chair and rose with a fluid grace she wouldn’t have associated with someone of his size. She knew all lycan were massive, but she hadn’t been around many of them.
She tipped her head to the side as she watched him studying the shelves. She was extremely curious to see what he picked. “How is Brokk doing?”
“Much better. He’s still sleeping, but his color has improved, and so has his breathing.”
“That’s great. Will your father be worried about you?”
“I sent him a crow this morning.”
Cole stopped his perusal of the shelves and removed a book. Lexi bit her lip as she impatiently waited to see what he chose. He examined the book for a minute before returning to the chair.
“Did you find something you liked?” she asked.
He turned the book toward her, and she laughed when she saw he held the Chamber of Secrets.
“Someone told me it was a good series,” he said with a smile that showed off his dazzling white teeth.
“They were correct.” She closed her book and held it across the gap between them. “I’ll trade you. I’ve already read it half a dozen times, and it’s better if you start at the beginning.”
He took the book from her and handed her the one he’d claimed. Leaning back in the chair, she opened the book, but she couldn’t concentrate as her gaze repeatedly returned to him. He didn’t have the same problem as he flipped through the pages.
The rustle of turning pages was the only sound in the room as an hour slipped past. She was acutely aware of his presence in the room, but it wasn’t uncomfortable.
A sense of peace enveloped her as his masculine scent teased her nostrils. She had no reason to feel safe in his presence, but she hadn’t felt this secure since her dad died.
When the grandfather clock down the hall chimed the hour, he set his book down and rose. “I should check on Brokk.”
Lexi buried her disappointment. He left the room, and she returned to her book, but unable to concentrate, she kept rereading the same page.
She was about to give up when he returned. She hated the leap of excitement her heart made. Becoming more entangled with this man could be the biggest mistake of her life, but she already craved the rush of life he made her experience whenever he was near.
The dark fae were loyal to very few, and she was well aware of what they needed to survive. She would only be one of many to him, but she still itched to feel the corded muscles of his arms around her again.
“Is he okay?” she asked to distract herself from her wayward thoughts.
“He’s still sleeping.”
“I’m sure he’ll wake soon.”
“So am I.”
He said this, but his brow remained furrowed as he reclaimed his seat. He didn’t pick the book back up. Instead, he stared at the empty fireplace. Her gaze swung between him and the fireplace as the unsettling possibility he might somehow see the entrance to the tunnel plagued her.
There’s no way he knows it’s there. But sweat broke out on her palms and beaded along her nape. Get it together, or he’s going to notice!
This was true, but she wasn’t one for subterfuge, and she could feel herself unraveling as she waited to see what he would do.
“How has it been for you since the war ended?” he asked after a few minutes.
Her shoulders relaxed as she stared at the fireplace and tried not to laugh in relief. The entrance was too well hidden to see. She had to calm down, or she was going to blow it.
When he turned toward her, she recalled his question and pondered the best way to answer it. He probably expected her to tell him things were great, her father’s side had won, but she couldn’t say that. She lost her dad in the war, and everything had been a struggle since the dragons torched the earth. She couldn’t lie about that.
“It’s… been… difficult,” she admitted.
“How so?”
An unexpected lump formed in her throat. “Not having my dad, for starters. He took care of so much around here, and he was my… everything.” Her gaze fell to her hands as she fiddled with the edge of her shirt. “Trying to keep this place running after his death and after so many workers deserted us has been a challenge, but Sahira and I are doing it.
“We have a human handyman who still comes to help Sahira and me with some repairs, but our live-in help is gone. The people who used to work and live here know we’re immortals now; there’s no point in continuing to hide it from them. Even if we never hurt them and always helped them, they still fear us. And who can blame them?”
“Who indeed?”
“Before, Sahira used to cast a glamour over us to make the humans think we were aging like them, but she gave that up after the war. There was no reason to drain herself by keeping up the pretense.”
“It’s a big place for the two of you to take care of on your own.”
Lexi shrugged. “It’s our home, and we’re not giving it up.”
Cole nodded but didn’t speak again. When the silence stretched onward, Lexi couldn’t stop herself from asking, “How has it been for you since the war ended?”
Cole stared at his hands as he contemplated this question. It had been hell for him since the war ended. Pure, unadulterated hell. The memory of those vicious battles lingered in his mind; the blood staining his hands would never come off, and the nightmares….
Well, he was certain the nightmares would haunt him for the rest of his days.
Before the war, he killed others, but he never slaughtered them with the ruthlessness he did during some battles. To him, many of those he slaughtered were innocents. Yes, they’d stood against the Lord, but so did he.
He hadn’t fought against the Lord on the battlefield. It had all been behind the scenes, and he’d failed.
However, no one could have foreseen the crazy bastard letting loose his dragons and slaughtering countless humans and immortals with such gleeful, ruthless intent.
Now, all he could do was make sure his brothers and so many others hadn’t died in vain by continuing to try to bring the Lord down from within. The ruler of the Shadow Realms, and the dragons, was insane, but he didn’t suspect their treason. That was the only hope they had of taking him down.
“It’s been… different,” he said. “It’s certainly been quieter at home with half of my brothers dead and two of the remaining ones banished and hunted as traitors.”
Lexi’s eyes involuntarily darted to the fireplace before returning to him. When her lungs began to burn, she realized she was holding her breath and released it slowly to not draw attention to herself.
She stared at him as her heart raced, and she wondered if he could tell his words had sent her into a mini panic attack. She didn’t want to discuss his brothers, but she couldn’t safely steer the conversation away without drawing attention to herself.
She remained outwardly calm as she replied, “That had to be difficult.”
“It was,” he said. “It is. Before the war, we were all close.”
This revelation surprised her. He cared for Brokk a great deal, but the dark fae were selfish, aloof creatures. Or maybe that was only the image they portrayed to the outer world. Or maybe it was because his family was a mix of half-breeds and therefore not as cold as the dark fae were said to be.
Orin was pure dark fae and a complete asshole, but maybe the others had bigger hearts. The lycan were known for loyalty to their families; perhaps that was the side of Cole she now saw.
“I’m sorry for your loss,” she murmured.
When his head tipped to the side, the sun shining over him emphasized the elegance of his square jaw, chiseled cheekbones, and Persian blue eyes.
“I’m sorry for your loss, too,” he said.
Lexi ducked her head as she blinked away her tears. It had been six months, but sometimes it still felt like it had only been an hour, and she would never get over her grief. This was one of those times.
“Thank you,” she whispered when she trusted herself to speak. And then, because she had to know what her father experienced before he died, she asked. “Was the war horrible?”
When he didn’t reply, she lifted her head to look at him again. His hands gripped the ends of his chair until his knuckles turned white and a muscle twitched in his cheek.
Looking at him, she wished she could take back the question. No matter what he said, she would always know the war had sliced many lacerations and scars onto his soul. And now she knew the last of her father’s life had been awful.
Of course, it was horrible. It was war. Countless immortals and mortals lost their lives.
He’d fought on the winning side, but that didn’t make it any less atrocious. It just meant he didn’t have a price on his head and countless enemies hunting him now that it was over.
Even the dark fae with their purported heartlessness would be affected by all the death they waded through to survive. It was only beings like Malakai who came through the war relatively unscathed.
“Yes,” he said.
When he didn’t elaborate any further, they sat in silence as the seconds turned into minutes.
Then he spoke again. “What happened to your mother?”
“My father didn’t tell you?”
Cole’s hands relaxed on the chair, and when he looked at her again, some of his tension ebbed. “No, he never spoke of her.”
“He didn’t tell me much about her either,” she admitted. “I know she was human and she died while giving birth to me. He told me he loved her, but I don’t think humans are meant to birth immortal creatures.”
“No, they’re not.”
“Her name was Sharon, and he said she was beautiful.”
Instinctively, her fingers went to her face, and she touched her cheek. Her father once told her she looked exactly like her mother. There were times when she looked in the mirror and tried to picture the woman who helped create her, but trying to imagine her face on a dead woman was unnerving.
“Like mother, like daughter,” Cole murmured.
Lexi’s eyes widened as he stared at her. He found her beautiful?
She wasn’t an idiot, and she owned a mirror, so she knew she wasn’t ugly, but to hear him say this sent a warm thrill of excitement through her.
“What about your mother?” she asked.
“She was killed when I was seven.”
Lexi’s hand flew to her mouth. “Oh, I’m sorry.”
He shrugged, but something in his eyes told her it wasn’t such a casual thing. “It was centuries ago.”
“It still must have been hard. I miss my mother, and I never knew her. I can’t imagine knowing her and losing her at such a young age.”
“At least I have memories of her. She was a good woman, kind and gentle. She loved my father and me very much.”
“What about your father?” she asked.
“What about him?”
“Did he love her?”
“With all his heart. He still does.”
The look on her face must have expressed her shock as he chuckled and draped his arm over the chair back.
“Despite what many think, the dark fae are very capable of love. In fact, since they so rarely give their love to anyone beyond their family, they often love deeper than most immortal creatures. My father never recovered from her death. He fathered other children, but she is the only one he loved and the only one he claimed as his wife.”
Somehow, she managed to keep herself from gawking at him like an idiot. Immortals rarely married, and when they did, it was forever. The bond was severed only by death or extreme circumstances.
“I didn’t know he had married,” she murmured.
“There’s no reason you should. They married hundreds of years ago, and while the dark fae like to think all the realms revolve around them, I realize not everyone feels the same way. I wouldn’t expect you to know our history, though many of my kind would.”
She chuckled as she rested her chin on her hand. He fascinated her; she could talk to him for hours, if not days.
However, when the clock chimed out the next hour, he rose from the chair. “I have to check on Brokk.”
She watched as he strode from the room before picking up her book again. There were so many things she should do today, but she didn’t move. She couldn’t bring herself to leave as she hoped for his return.
Ten minutes later, he entered the room again. Alert for him this time, she caught his footfall in the hall and lifted her head as he glided toward his chair.
His movements mesmerized her; there was something animalistic about him. Something primal and lethal and utterly seductive in a way that might make her a little insane.
“Any change?” she asked as he settled onto the chair once more.
“No.”
“I’m sure he’ll wake soon.”
“I hope so.”
He picked up his book and started reading again. She did the same, though her attention remained mostly on him.
After a few minutes, he set the book down and turned toward her. “What do you like to do for fun, Lexi?”
She lifted her book and waved it at him. “Read.”
“What else?”
“Riding, and before the war, I’d often go for hikes with my dad. Sometimes Sahira would join us. I also like to fish.”
“Did you go to parties?”
“My father had a few here that I attended as a teen, but I never went to the Shadow Realms until your father’s invite arrived. Once the war started, the parties stopped.”
“That they did.”
“What about you, Cole? What do you like to do for fun?”
There was one thing the dark fae loved to do for fun, but she hoped he didn’t answer that.
“I also like to read and listen to music, and I attended many parties over the years.”
“Did you travel to different Shadow Realms?”
“I did.”
She set her book in her lap as she leaned forward. “What are they like? Are they all as fantastical as the Gloaming? Which realm is your favorite?”
“My favorite is the Gloaming; there’s nothing like home. But the witches’ realm is amazing, as is the lycan’s, and there are many others inhabited by numerous, immortal species. Many of them, I would never travel to. And then there is the siren realm and the imps.”
Lexi propped her chin on her hand as he talked about the different realms and all the many immortal creatures she would never meet. The deep timbre of his voice and the pictures he painted enthralled her.
She could listen to him talk for hours, and though he got up to check on Brokk every hour, that was exactly what they did. The sun was setting when she reluctantly pulled herself away from him.
She went upstairs to clean up another guest room in case he decided to sleep away from Brokk tonight. When she finished, she went out to bring in the horses.
She returned to the manor and discovered him sitting at Brokk’s side. She told him about the other room, but she doubted he would sleep in it.
“Thank you,” he said.
She bid him good night and closed the door.
Cole found Lexi in the library again the next day and settled into the chair beside her. He couldn’t stop himself from smiling at her as she lowered her book and beamed at him. That smile warmed his heart and could light up all the realms. He basked in its radiance.
“How is Brokk?” she asked as she set her book down. “I poked my head in to check on him, but you were both sleeping.”
“He woke in the middle of the night,” Cole said as he rubbed his beard. “He was up long enough to drink some blood before passing out again, but he was talking, and he’s getting stronger.”
“That’s great news.”
It was certainly a relief to him. He’d never been so happy to hear his brother call him an asshole for leaving Becca’s establishment.
“I hope you don’t mind if we stay,” he said. “I think it will be a few days before he’s strong enough to travel.”
“Stay for as long as you need.”
He picked up the book he’d been reading yesterday, but his gaze continuously shifted to her as she sat with her legs dangling over the side of the chair. Her feet kicked leisurely back and forth as she turned the pages of her book.
He’d dreamt about her last night, and it was the first time since the war ended that he hadn’t had a nightmare.
Instead of blood and death, his dreams were filled with her smile and the warmth of her body. In those dreams, he stripped her bare and tasted every inch of her before taking her. Instead of waking with a scream trapped in his throat, he awoke aching for more.
He’d been about to rise and pad down the hall to knock on her door, but as he was contemplating going to her, Brokk woke up.
After that, he couldn’t leave his brother’s side.
However, his hunger for her was growing, and he didn’t know how much longer he could deny himself. He didn’t understand why he was restraining himself. The only reason he could come up with was that he believed her to be innocent. If he moved too fast, he might scare her away.
He’d never done slow before, but he could if it meant getting her in his bed, where she belonged.
He read for a bit, but he watched her more. Finally, he gave up and lowered his book. “What’s your favorite music, Lexi?”
He’d learned a lot about her yesterday, but he was eager to learn more.
She set her book down as she met his gaze. “I love the songs the pixies create and rock music like Five Finger Death Punch and Disturbed. What about you?”
“I enjoy pixie songs and Creedence Clearwater Revival.”
“Oh, they are good,” she agreed.
He spent the rest of the morning alternating between checking on Brokk and learning more about her. The clock was striking twelve when she rose from her chair and stretched.
“I have some work I have to do in the gardens. Is there anything I can get you before I go?” she asked.
He buried his disappointment; if he had his way, she’d never do menial labor again, but it was not his place to get involved in her life. Unless it resulted in getting her in his bed. An image of Del rose in his mind, but he pushed it away. His friend was dead, and his daughter was an adult who could make her own decisions.
“No, and I know where the kitchen is if I do need something,” he said.
She smiled at him before leaving the room. It felt emptier without her, and he didn’t like it. Rising from the chair, he took his book upstairs and returned to Brokk.
The next morning, Lexi found herself staring at the clock more than her book as she waited for Cole. When the clock struck nine and he still didn’t arrive, she began to fear he wouldn’t come today.
She squelched her disappointment and kept reading, but she couldn’t concentrate on the words. At nine thirty, she almost shouted with joy when he strode into the room and smiled at her.
And then she cursed herself for being an idiot. He’s a dark fae!
The reminder should have doused some of her excitement; it didn’t. It was difficult to keep her distance when she was growing to like him more and more with every passing day.
Freshly showered, his hair was still damp and tousled as he ran his fingers through it. She’d found a few more articles of clothing for him and had given them to him last night, but none fit him properly. The shirt was far too tight through his shoulders and chest, and the pants stopped a couple of inches above his ankles.
On anyone else, the clothes would have looked ridiculous, but he somehow managed to wear them with a sexy confidence that was entirely too tempting. Her mouth went dry as he plopped into the other chair and sprawled out his tall, powerful form.
“Good morning,” he greeted.
“Good morning,” she replied. “How’s Brokk?”
“Better. Sahira came in a little bit ago to put a new salve on him, and he stayed awake throughout it. He’s talking, he’s fed more, and he’s healing. I think he’ll be back to normal in a couple of days.”
“That’s good.”
She was glad to hear that, but she dreaded the day he left. She enjoyed talking to him, and he brought a bit of excitement to an otherwise dull and, she was beginning to realize, rather lonely life.
She glanced at the book in his hand, but she already knew he was now on book three when she discovered it missing from the shelf this morning. He must have come down sometime last night to get the book. Deciding to leave him to Harry Potter, she opted for a little bit of horror and chose a book of short stories instead.
“You’re enjoying the books,” she said and waved at the book in his hand.
Cole glanced at it. “Far more than I thought I would.”
“Good.”
“That Snape guy is an asshole.”
Lexi laughed. “Oh, just wait.”
He smiled as he settled into the chair, and when they lapsed into a comfortable silence, she returned to her book. When he got up to check on Brokk an hour later, she finished her book and rose from the chair.
She returned the book to its place on the shelves and clasped her hands behind her back as she circled the room in search of her next read. She scanned the numerous spines until they landed on Jaws.
She’d read it a couple of times, but it had been a few years, and she was in the mood to revisit an old favorite. Standing on tiptoe, she stretched for the book. Her fingers had just brushed the spine when she felt Cole against her back.
She hadn’t heard him return, and it had been days since they last touched, but she would never forget the exquisite sensation of his body against hers or the way he could turn her bones to liquid.
“I’ll get that for you,” he murmured.
It took everything she had not to lean back into him as she dropped down from her tiptoes. When his hand settled possessively on her hip, it sent a shiver down her spine. He plucked the book from the shelf and handed it to her.
When she took it from him, their fingers brushed and a fiery spark shot through her. Her legs trembled, and she was afraid her knees might give out. Instead of stepping away, the hand on her hip pulled her back and nestled her against his chest.
“Jaws,” he murmured as he turned the book over in front of her. “One of my favorites.”
His breath stirred her hair, and he lowered his head until his lips nearly brushed her ear. Despite knowing she should keep her distance from this man, she’d dreamt about his kiss often and wanted another one.
She shouldn’t do it, but she found herself lifting her head and turning toward him. Her eyes held his as his hand slid from her hip to her belly. His muscles bunched around her, and when he growled, his eyes shifted to silver.
The abrupt color change, and what it represented, astounded her, but before she could react, his head bent and his mouth claimed hers. And there was no doubt it was a claiming kiss as it was relentless, possessive, and so demanding the only thing she could do was yield to it.
When her mouth opened and his tongue swept in, the book slid from her fingers. It thudded against the floor. She wanted to turn and wrap her arms around him, but he held her so firmly against him that it was impossible to move.
Then his hand slid beneath her shirt, brushed against her skin, and caused her knees to shake. His touch left her desperate for more.
Each caress of his fingers and stroke of his tongue awakened something inside her that she’d never known existed. She knew what it was like to wake aching from dreams, and she’d satisfied that with her fingers, but she could never douse this hunger with anything less than him.
Was this what it was like to be shadow kissed? The possibility should terrify her, but she couldn’t bring herself to care as his fingers skimmed up her belly and across the bottom of her bra before his thumb circled her nipple.
When her knees gave out, his other arm cinched around her waist, and he held her up as he touched her more intimately than anyone ever had before.
She wanted—no, she needed more.
This time, when she tried to turn, he let her. She moaned when his hand fell away from her breast, but then he gripped her hips and lifted her off the ground without breaking the kiss. Her legs instinctively encircled his waist, and the rigid evidence of his erection rubbed between her thighs.
She clung to him as he braced one hand against the shelves while his other hand cupped her ass. Her pulse raced as every part of her became centered on him. It felt as if the very fabric of her being was shifting and becoming something different, something more alive and free.
She’d never expected to feel this way, but she relished the freedom, abandon, and carefreeness she’d never experienced before.
Over the years, she’d read countless romance novels and seen more than a few love scenes in movies and on TV, but she’d never expected this all-encompassing yearning for another.
Her fingers sliding down the front of his chest pushed aside buttons until her hands met his flesh. Beneath her palms, his skin was hot, and she felt the solid, thundering beat of his heart. When her nails scraped his flesh, he nipped her bottom lip with fangs he didn’t have only seconds ago.
Only when he first arrived and was out of control with his terror for Brokk had she seen his fangs and silver eyes. Those two things were signs a lycan was losing control, and a lycan on the verge of losing control was extremely dangerous, but his slipping composure only excited her more.
She didn’t know what that said about her, and right now, she didn’t care.
When he bit her lip again, she mewled and wiggled against him. She stopped caring that he was part dark fae or that he would probably feed on her and break her heart if she wasn’t careful; she just wanted more of him.
Before she could experience that more, a heavy round of knocking reverberated throughout the manor. A tingle of annoyance shot through her, but she ignored it, just as she ignored the knocking.
Her fingers entangled in his hair, and the kiss deepened. When her fingers brushed over the tips of his ears, he groaned. She loved the feel of the point beneath her fingers, and if his response was any indication, he enjoyed it too.
When another round of knocking sounded, she couldn’t ignore it anymore.
She reluctantly tore her mouth away from his, and Cole’s hands tightened on her. Lowering his head, he kissed her neck before sliding lower to her collarbone.
The heat of his mouth caused Lexi to shiver, but another round of knocking dampened her lust. Like a bucket of ice water was dumped on her head, reality returned.
She’d been about to give herself to a dark fae in her library. With the doors open, Sahira could have walked in at any time, and Lexi could end up one of the many mindless, shadow kissed souls if she wasn’t careful.
The hairs on her nape rose at the possibility. She liked him, but not enough to become one of them.
The knocking grew louder and more incessant. The last time someone sounding more than a little annoyed was pounding on her front door, Cole arrived with a half-dead Brokk in his arms.
Now, she had no idea who stood on the other side of her door, but it didn’t sound good.
Releasing his hair, she rested her hands on his shoulders and unlocked her legs from around his waist. She slid down the front of him.
The friction between them created a new firestorm in her body. Her legs wobbled when her toes touched the ground, and she almost jumped back into his arms.
“Ignore them,” he whispered in her ear before he nipped her lobe.
She wanted to do exactly that, but Sahira had to walk past the library doors to answer the door, and her aunt couldn’t find them like this. At the possibility of such a thing happening, her cheeks started to burn.
“I can’t,” she said.
His arms locked around her, and for a second, she didn’t think he was going to release her. Then he let her go and stepped back.
Lexi’s eyes widened as she took him in. His silver eyes burned like hot coals, his fangs were clearly visible behind the lips flattened into a thin, white line, and his shoulders hunched forward in a way that said he was straining to retain control.
She recalled some of the horror stories she’d heard about lycans who lost control. They became beasts that shredded everything in their path and tore through their victims like they were no more than pieces of paper instead of flesh and bone.
She didn’t think he would hurt her, but she didn’t dare move. And then, she spotted that cipher near his temple again.
Something about her rattled not only his control over the lycan part of him but also the dark fae. She didn’t know if she should relish that knowledge or be terrified of it.
Either way, she became aware that the power Cole revealed to the world was only the tip of the iceberg. Far more of it thrummed beneath his surface.
Enthralled by him, Lexi almost jumped when another series of loud knocks bounced off the walls.
“I have to get that,” she said and was happy when her voice didn’t tremble.
Cole stepped further away from her, but when his gaze swung toward the library doors and his lips skimmed back, she worried he might attack whoever had arrived.
Lexi gulped, but she couldn’t let the knock go unanswered, and she couldn’t let Sahira find them like this. They weren’t touching anymore, but her aunt would know something had happened.
Lexi straightened her shirt and threw back her shoulders. He started to reach for her, but his hand stopped and hovered in midair before falling to his side. They stared at each other before Lexi edged away from him and started for the doors.
She almost glanced at the fireplace but stopped herself before she did. It couldn’t be Orin at her door. He was probably growing increasingly angry at her for not returning to him, but he was still safely tucked beneath the manor.
Or she assumed he was. When she hadn’t returned, he might have gotten pissed off enough to leave, but she doubted he would risk capture by coming to her front door afterward. At least she hoped he wasn’t that stupid.
Cole inhaled a shuddery breath as he strained to regain control of himself. He was no longer just battling the lycan part of himself but also the hungry dark fae. It had been over a week since he last satisfied his dark fae urges.
He hadn’t gone this long since childhood, and he hadn’t realized how ravenous he was until now. As he stared at the wall of books and willed his erection away, he tried to recall when he last fed.
He didn’t remember the woman, but that was nothing new; he didn’t remember most of them. The rare few made return appearances in his bed, and it was never because he wanted more of them, but because they ran in the same circles, like Becca.
But as Cole recalled the last time he fed, he realized it was before meeting her. His head swiveled to watch Lexi as she glided toward the doors, and his softening erection stirred again.
Shit, he sucked a breath in through his teeth and fisted his hands. His nails dug into his palms as he willed himself to let her go.
Not only was he hungry, but every part of him craved her, and it was only a matter of time before he had her. He would not be denied much longer.
He rested his hand against the shelf as she vanished into the hall, but another round of knocking, and not being able to see her anymore, spurred him into motion.
She was at the door when he stepped into the hallway. From the corner of his eye, he saw Sahira emerging from the hall leading to the kitchen. She was wiping her hands on a dishtowel as she walked. When her eyes met his, he saw the concern in them as she stopped a few feet away.
Lexi cracked the door open, but she didn’t open it enough for him to see who stood on the other side. However, a familiar scent caused his hackles to rise.
“Elexiandra,” Malakai purred from the other side of the door.
Sahira stiffened, and when he glanced at her again, he saw a hardness that had never been there before. Not even when she was warning him away from Lexi had she looked so tense. Her chin jutted out as her eyes met his again.
She gave a subtle nod of her head toward the door. Cole didn’t need her to tell him to intervene in this, he already planned to do so, but it astounded him that she found him less of a threat to Lexi than Malakai.
He hurried to intervene.
Lexi’s hand tightened on the door as Malakai rested his hand on the frame and leaned toward her. His brown eyes burned with an intensity that made her stomach churn. A cruel maliciousness burned in those eyes as he smiled at her.
It took everything she had not to step away from him, but she managed to hold her ground. The unraveling control of the dark fae prince made her a little uneasy, but Cole never made her skin crawl like Malakai did.
Malakai was smiling at her, in complete control of himself, and couldn’t make her one of the shadow kissed, but he was far more of a menace to her than Cole.
For one thing, Malakai wanted to marry her and rule over her life and lands. She’d rather be tied behind a horse and dragged naked over a field of glass before being dumped in a vat of rubbing alcohol than have such a thing happen, but staying free of him could become the biggest battle of her life.
She had a feeling he would make that life miserable until he got his way.
“Malakai,” she greeted flatly.
His eyes fell to her lips and narrowed. She almost touched them but stopped herself. Now that he’d drawn her attention to them, she realized how swollen Cole’s kisses had left her mouth.
“Is there something I can help you with?” she asked.
“I came by to speak with you about something. I thought we could take a walk.”
Lexi glanced at the sun and then the amulet at his throat. What did he do to earn it?
Knowing Malakai, it was something awful. She inwardly recoiled from him even as she remained standing where she was. He unnerved her more than a child speaking in tongues, but if she revealed that to him, he would use it to his advantage.
She suspected he knew he unnerved her, and he liked it.
“I’m too busy for a walk,” she said. “I’m sorry you wasted your time coming here.”
She started to shut the door, but he threw out his hand to keep it open. Leaning closer, his grin revealed all his perfect white teeth, but it didn’t reach his eyes.
If the eyes were the window to the soul, then Malakai’s soul was more rotten than meat left out in the summer sun for weeks on end.
“I’m sure you can spare a few minutes of your time, Elexiandra. I have some very important things to speak with you about,” he said.
She suspected some of those important things were marriage, and she was not in the mood to deal with that. Even before Cole entered her life, she was determined not to bind herself to this man. But now that she knew what it was like to desire another so completely and like them, she would never agree to marry Malakai.
Unfortunately, she might not have a choice.
“I can’t, Malakai,” she said. “You’ve come at a bad time.”
A flash of red ran through Malakai’s eyes before he managed to suppress it. Whereas the signs of Cole losing control excited her, this loss of restraint from Malakai caused her blood to run cold. Cole wouldn’t destroy her life; Malakai would.
“I have to go,” she said and tried to close the door again, but he refused to remove his hand.
He leaned closer as he hissed. “I’m not playing, Elexiandra.”
“Neither am I,” she grated out as she glared at him.
Yes, he terrified her, and he might force her into a loveless and most likely brutal marriage, but she would not let him push her around. She would not give in to him without a fight.
“Please leave,” she said.
This time when his eyes flashed red, Lexi braced herself for him to lash out at her, but before he could hit her, an arm enveloped her waist. Cole tugged at the door, and she released it to him.
As he opened the door further, he pulled her possessively against his chest. His posture was casual, but hostility coursed through his coiled muscles.
Malakai rose away from her and his mouth parted before he closed it. Then he gave her a scathing look as his lip curled in disgust.
Lexi’s shoulders went back, and her chin lifted defiantly. Getting involved with a dark fae was a stupid decision, but she decided to make it, and she wasn’t going to be judged for it by this asshole.
“What’s going on here?” Cole inquired.
“I’ve come to speak with Elexiandra,” Malakai said in a clipped tone.
“As she said, she’s busy right now.”
Lexi glanced between the two men. Out of the two of them, there was no doubt who was more powerful, but Malakai was not the type to fight fair.
When Malakai’s attention shifted back to her, there was no denying the loathing in his eyes. “I’ll be back soon.”
Cole’s fingers tightened on her hip, and before she could reply, Malakai vanished. She stood staring at the spot where he’d been before Cole guided her back and closed the door.
“That should keep him away for a while,” Cole said.
“He’ll be back,” Lexi muttered. “He always comes back, except he’ll be pissed off next time, and you won’t be here.”
Needing to be alone, Lexi shrugged out of his hold and backed away from him. Cole reached for her, but she dodged his hand and hurried down the hall as she resisted running.
There was nowhere for her to go, and she didn’t know who she was running from, Malakai, Cole, or herself and her shitty decisions.
As she strode down the hall, she spotted Sahira standing in the shadows next to the stairs. Sahira opened her mouth to say something, but whatever she saw on Lexi’s face silenced her.
She didn’t say a word to her aunt as she went up the stairs to her room.
Cole followed Lexi for a few feet before stopping to watch as she disappeared into the hallway above. She’d purposely avoided him, and she needed some time alone. In truth, so did he as the echo of her words continued in his head.
When the click of her door closing sounded a few seconds later, his attention shifted to Sahira. She stood with her shoulders slumped forward and her eyes closed.
“How bad is it with him?” he asked her.
Sahira opened her eyes and met his gaze. “He won’t stop until he gets what he wants.”
“And that’s Lexi.”
“Lexi, the manor, and the land. He intends to marry her.”
Cole felt like she’d kicked him in the nuts. Not only could he not stand the idea of Lexi as Malakai’s wife, but he couldn’t imagine her married to that asshole. Malakai would destroy her.
However, Malakai must want her and everything she offered badly if he was willing to marry her for it. Marriage was sacred to immortals, and it was rare when something other than death severed the bond.
“He’s been asking for her hand in marriage since she was fourteen,” Sahira continued. “Her father always refused him.”
“Fourteen? She was only a child.”
“She was beautiful, even then.”
“I’m sure she was, but immortals don’t marry for beauty or lust.”
“Malakai’s different. His property abuts ours, and not only does he want her, but he’s also after both lands.”
“And when Del refused to let them marry, she became an obsession to him.”
“When Del refused to let her be his concubine, she became an obsession,” Sahira corrected.
“He wanted to take her as a concubine at fourteen?”
“Yes. He later offered marriage, but my brother was not going to let that happen.”
Cole’s claws lengthened and retracted as he glanced over his shoulder at the closed door. He’d never liked Malakai, but now he despised the man even more.
“And now that Del is gone, he thinks it’s open season on her,” Sahira said. “And nothing is going to stop him.”
“I will.”
Sahira laughed mirthlessly and rolled her eyes. “And why would you do that?”
Why would he do that? He wanted and liked Lexi, but why involve himself in her life? He’d never given a single fuck about any of the other women he’d desired before.
Lexi wasn’t like those other women. For one thing, her father had been his friend and co-conspirator against the Lord. He was a man Cole respected, and he could not forget Del’s love for his daughter or the fact they were friends.
Cole kept his gaze focused on the front door as he recalled the red in Malakai’s eyes and the hatred on his face. Malakai coveted Lexi, but he also despised her.
Her father had turned him down—she’d turned him down and became the one thing he couldn’t have. If he ever got his hands on her, he would destroy her for that.
“Del was my friend, and I can’t forget that. We saved each other’s lives many times during the war, and I won’t leave his daughter unprotected,” Cole told Sahira.
There was more to it than that, but he wasn’t in the mood to figure it out. Cole stalked away from the door and started up the stairs. He’d only traversed a couple of them before Sahira spoke again.
“And who is going to protect her from you?”
He stopped walking, and his head turned toward her. When he met her steely gaze, Cole glowered at her, but the witch didn’t back down.
Turning away, he stalked up the stairs. When he arrived at the top, he spotted Brokk leaning against the doorway of his room. Cole’s step faltered at the sight of his brother’s sweat-streaked face.
“Who indeed, brother?” Brokk inquired.
Cole’s shock faded as he scowled at his brother. “What are you doing out of bed?”
“Who could sleep with all that pounding?”
Cole strode toward him, and clasping his arm, he swung it around his shoulders and supported Brokk’s weight as he steered him into the room. “You shouldn’t be up.”
“I had to make sure someone wasn’t coming to kill us,” Brokk muttered as he let Cole lead him back to the bed.
Cole lowered his arm from his shoulders and sat him on the edge of the mattress. Brokk fell back with a groan. Grasping his legs, Cole swung them into the bed.
“I’m not an invalid,” Brokk protested, but as he pushed himself up to rest his back against the bed, he winced and lifted his arm to wipe the sweat from his brow.
“You’re barely any better,” Cole muttered as he jerked the blankets over his brother.
“I’m doing a lot better.”
“Yes, you managed to stand today. You’re doing fucking fantastic.”
Cole ignored the finger Brokk gave him.
“What game are you playing with the girl?” Brokk asked when Cole finished getting him settled.
Cole sat in the chair he’d become far too familiar with over the past few days. “I’m not playing any game with her.”
Brokk winced as he pushed himself further into a seated position. “I heard your conversation with Sahira. We’re not exactly known to do things out of the kindness of our hearts, but I’ve never known you to play with an innocent’s head.”
“I’m not playing with her head.”
“She’s young, and we both know she’s inexperienced. She’s led a sheltered life here.”
“How can you say that when you barely know her?”
“I know she’s an innocent, and so do you. I remember how Del talked about her and how he kept her protected from the worst of the realms. He was our friend, and she doesn’t know how to handle creatures like Malakai or us. You’ve never been one to take advantage of that, so what game are you playing, Cole?”
Cole gripped the ends of the chair. “I told you, I’m not playing any game. I owe it to Del and her to keep her safe, and I plan to do exactly that. They took us in here, and they kept you alive; I will repay that debt.”
Brokk’s head fell back and hit the headboard with a small thud. “It’s a debt I’ll repay too, and she is beautiful. They both are.”
“Stay away from Lexi,” Cole warned.
Brokk lifted his head and met his gaze, but his brother was smart enough to keep his mouth shut.
Lexi poked her head into Brokk’s room and was pleased to discover him sitting up with his back against the headboard and a book on his lap. When he looked up at her, he smiled as she stepped into the room.
“How are you feeling?” she asked.
He laid the book down as she approached the bed. Though he remained paler than normal, his eyes were bright, and the color had returned to his handsome face. His blond hair was disheveled, and he could probably use a shower, but he was on the road to recovery, which meant he and Cole would leave soon.
Lexi pushed aside the pang of disappointment accompanying the realization as she stopped next to his bed. She would miss Cole, which meant she was an idiot who allowed herself to get too attached to a dark fae.
“I’m much better,” Brokk said. “Thank you for taking me in.”
She waved away his gratitude. “Anyone would have done the same.”
“No, they wouldn’t, and we both know that.”
His aqua eyes perused her from head to toe, but she didn’t sense any sexual interest from him. However, the intensity of his gaze made her shift uncomfortably.
“Can I get you anything?” she asked.
“No, I’m good,” he said.
“We have a TV downstairs, and the electricity is working right now; I can bring it up so you can watch it. There aren’t many channels left, but sometimes they air something decent.”
“I’m good. Cole gave me this book to read.” He held up the first Harry Potter book for her to see. “Have you read this?”
Lexi bit back a laugh as she stared at the cover. “A few times.”
“It’s really good.”
This time, she couldn’t stop herself from chuckling. “I told your brother the same thing.”
And he’d liked it enough to recommend it to his brother, which meant she’d turned him into a Potter groupie. Now she had someone to discuss the books with as Sahira refused to read books about wizards. She claimed she had enough witches and warlocks to deal with without reading about them.
“I can’t tell you the number of times Cole has been wrong over the years, but he wasn’t wrong about this,” Brokk said.
“He may have been wrong a lot over the years, but I’m always right,” she said.
Brokk laughed. “Over the years, I’ve learned most women are always right.”
Lexi glanced around the room, but there was nowhere for Cole to hide in here. She couldn’t stop herself from asking. “Where is Cole?”
“He decided against spending another night sleeping on the chair, so he’s settling into the guestroom you gave him.”
Lexi clasped her hands before her. “Are you sure you don’t need anything?”
“Some company,” he said and waved at the chair. “My brother’s not exactly a barrel full of laughs.”
She strode around the bed and settled into the chair Cole often occupied. “I’m not sure I’ll be much better.”
“You have to be better than a pissy lycan with the arrogance of a dark fae.”
A burst of laughter escaped her. “You’re right; I’m a lot better than that.”
“I thought so,” Brokk said. “So, Elexiandra—”
“Call me Lexi.”
“So, Lexi, has my brother been driving you crazy?”
She leaned back in the chair. One of his brothers had infuriated her, but she couldn’t tell him that. The other one had been…. Well, she wasn’t entirely sure what Cole had been doing to her, but yes, he was making her a little crazy.
“It’s been nice to have some company,” she admitted. With his dazzling smile and twinkling eyes, Brokk was incredibly easy to talk to. “Though I wish you’d come here under better circumstances.”
“So do I.”
His eyes ran over her, and he studied her with that strange intensity again, but she still sensed only curiosity from him. Unlike Cole and Orin, he was easy-going, which was odd considering he’d nearly died.
“It looks like you’ll be good to go soon,” she said.
“I should, but I don’t think Cole’s in any rush.”
Her forehead furrowed, but before she could respond, Cole stepped into the room. His massive frame took up most of the doorframe as he gazed at them with an expression she couldn’t quite figure out. He looked annoyed but also amused and a little shocked.
Then his gaze settled on her and a sexy smile curved his lips. Butterflies erupted in her stomach as that smile warmed her to her soul. Yes, she was an idiot who had allowed herself to get too close to a dark fae, and she was going to miss him when he left.
“Cole!” Brokk greeted loudly. “We were just talking about you.”
Lexi tried to suppress the blush creeping up her neck and into her cheeks, but she failed. She’d been hoping Cole hadn’t heard their conversation, but Brokk was happy to inform him that he was their topic.
A steel edge settled into Cole’s eyes when they flicked to his brother. “I heard.”
Lexi rose from the chair. “I should go. Are you sure you don’t need anything?” she asked Brokk.
“No, thank you.”
She strode around the bed and toward the doorway, but Cole didn’t move out of her way. Her step slowed as she approached him. Memories of what passed between them in the library flooded her, and her mouth went dry.
If he didn’t move, she’d either be stuck in this room with them or forced to squeeze past him. And if Lexi touched him again, she might kiss him, and if she did, she didn’t know if she would stop.
“You don’t have to rush off on my account,” Cole said as his gaze raked over her.
Her step faltered. “I’m not.”
Though she was.
After the library events, and then with Malakai, she wasn’t entirely sure what to do about him. She couldn’t deny she was coming to like and even care for him, but if she allowed herself to get closer to him, it would only lead to heartache, and her heart had been battered enough this year.
And since they were leaving soon, she had to put some distance between them.
Cole reluctantly stepped out of her way so she could pass. She glanced at him, but her gaze fell to the floor as she slipped by him. The blush warming her cheeks was endearing and adorable.
It took all he had not to clasp her wrist and halt her, but he didn’t move as she left the room. Stepping back, he watched the sway of her hips as she strolled down the hall and descended the steps.
When she was gone, he turned his attention back to his brother, who grinned at him. When Cole scowled at him, the smile slid from Brokk’s face.
“I’m warning you, Brokk, don’t fuck with her.”
Brokk pushed himself up higher on the bed. “Unlike you, brother, I have no intention of doing so.”
“I’m not fucking with her,” Cole said.
“Maybe not, but it’s obvious you desire her. And not only is she an innocent, but she’s a good person, and I like her. Del was also our friend, and I don’t want to see his daughter hurt.”
“That’s not going to happen.”
“You’re part dark fae, Cole. It’s what the fae do.”
“You’re as much dark fae as I am.”
“I didn’t say I wasn’t, but I’m also not trying to screw our host. So, in that sense, I’m less dark fae than you while we’re here.”
“I’m not trying to screw her,” Cole said.
“Yes, you are. You can deny it, but we both know the truth. It’s what the dark fae do. But this time, before you act, take a look at what you’re leaving in your wake.”
“You nearly died, but I’ll still beat the shit out of you.”
Brokk laughed as he lifted his book. “You could try, but we both know you love me too much to mar the perfection that is me.”
Normally, Brokk’s arrogance made Cole smile, but as his gaze returned to where he last saw Lexi, he didn’t feel much like smiling. What did he want from her?
No doubt, he planned to have her in his bed, but what would the aftermath be for her? She was an innocent; he couldn’t deny that. After hundreds of years, he knew how to spot one, but so what?
She wouldn’t be the first woman whose innocence he took, and she wouldn’t be the last. Something inside him recoiled at the idea of taking another woman to his bed, but he was dark fae, and that was what they did.
It’s what he’d done his entire life, but even after he moved on, he would make sure she stayed safe from Malakai.
“I’m enjoying this book,” Brokk said.
“I told you it was good,” Cole muttered as his attention shifted back to his brother.
“These witches and wizards are much more likable than our witches and warlocks, though.”
This time, Cole did laugh. “That they are.”
The howling wind rattling her windows woke Lexi. She blinked into the darkness before rolling over to stare at the night pressing against the glass.
Rain plastered the window as the wind blew it against the panes and whipped it across the land. Normally, she loved the sounds of a storm, but there was something about this storm that made her feel lonely. It was as if the world beyond that window had ceased to exist and only she remained.
Pushing aside her blankets, she rose and walked over to the glass. She rested her fingers against the cool surface as a rolling wave of thunder built to a crescendo that shook the manor. In the distance, lightning pierced the earth.
Electricity crackled the air as more bolts illuminated the scorched earth beyond the glass. The broken and barren landscape didn’t help her feel less alone in the world. She turned away from the window.
She eyed her bed, but sleep would elude her for as long as the storm raged. She grabbed her robe—her adult one—pulled it on, and tied it. Leaving her room behind, she padded down the hall to find something to munch on while watching the storm.
She was almost to the end of the hall when a muffled shout halted her. Straining to hear over the rain beating against the roof and the howling wind, she listened for another sound but didn’t hear anything.
Had she imagined it? Did the storm create the noise?
Turning, her eyes fell on Brokk’s door, and she crept toward it. Had he experienced a setback?
Her hand fell on the knob, and she hesitated before starting to turn it. She didn’t want to knock and risk waking him if he was sleeping, but she couldn’t just walk in there.
When the thunder faded away again, another muffled shout sounded, and she realized it wasn’t coming from Brokk’s room. She retreated from his door and retraced her steps down the hall until she stood outside the room she’d given to Cole.
She rested her hand on the knob but didn’t turn it. When another muffled shout started seconds before another clap of thunder boomed through the night, she knew she couldn’t walk away without checking on him first. For all she knew, someone had broken into the manor and was attacking him.
That possibility speared her into motion, and before she could think about it anymore, she turned the knob and inched the door open. If someone was attacking him, then she couldn’t alert them to her presence.
The element of surprise was her biggest advantage here. And if no one was in the room with him, then she didn’t want to wake him.
When the door opened enough for her to see into the room, she realized he was alone. Flashes of lightning revealed the small dresser, fireplace, and bathroom door across from the king-sized bed. Dark blue curtains framed the windows.
On the bed, Cole lay entangled in the dark blue comforter. His face was turned away from her, and his hands were twisted into the sheets. The corded muscles of his arms and neck stood starkly out.
Black ciphers ran from the tips of his fingers, up his arms, across his shoulders, and a few of the flames licked at his chin. She couldn’t tell if they went down his back, but there weren’t any on his chest.
When his head turned toward her, Lexi prepared to bolt. She was about to be caught entering his room. However, when his eyes remained closed, she realized he was having a nightmare.
Some of her tension eased, and she started to retreat, but a muffled sound of anguish stopped her. She’d heard sounds like that coming from wounded animals before, and it tore at her heart.
She couldn’t walk away from any creature in distress, let alone Cole.
Knowing she was playing with fire, she stepped away from the door and closed it behind her. She stared at it for a second before taking a deep breath, gathering her courage, and cautiously approaching the bed.
Uncertain of what to do, she stood beside him as thunder boomed and lightning illuminated the room. This close to him, she couldn’t help but marvel over the power he emanated.
He was nearly twice her size, and though he was also a half-breed, he was a combination of two of the most powerful immortal creatures in existence. His half-breed status made him more powerful, unlike her.
Her human half made her weaker; she was immortal, and she was faster and stronger than any human, but she didn’t possess the same strength as a full-blooded vampire. She couldn’t even transport.
When he thrashed on the bed and his head twisted away, Lexi buried her trepidation and stretched a hand toward him. A bolt struck right outside the manor; its electricity caused the hair on her nape to rise at the same time her fingers met his flesh.
She wasn’t sure if it was the electricity pulsing through the room or the contact with him, but her entire body tingled and her heart raced. She didn’t have time to figure it out before his eyes flew open, his hand seized her wrist, and he jerked her forward.
Before she had a chance to react, he pinned her beneath him, and his hand was enclosing on her throat. Then her air cut off.
The thunderous boom of the dragons ravaging the earth reverberated around Cole. He was swept up in a sea of death, surrounded by enemies, and hacking his way through their bodies as he sought to destroy the adversaries closing in on him.
Why couldn’t they all die? And where were they all coming from?
Blood coated his hair, slid down his face, and plastered his clothes to him. Those clothes weighed him down, but he continued to hack and carve and slaughter his way through the immortals surrounding him.
The stench of blood clogged his nose as it caked his nostrils. Breathing through his mouth was the only option, and when he did, he inhaled blood until it coated his tongue.
He spit the blood out, but it filled his mouth faster than he could rid himself of it. The dragons released another wave of fire upon the world. Their flames leapt so high that shadows of fire danced across the land until it looked like a black inferno was spreading toward them.
One of his enemies grasped his sword hand, and spinning toward the faceless beast, Cole seized its throat and smashed it into the ground.
The roar of dragons and the pulse of blood filled his ears as his hand tightened on his enemy’s throat. Their fists battered him, but he barely felt the blows as blood dripped from his hair and splashed onto his victim.
The punches hit him harder; his victim squirmed beneath him, but he kept them pinned as he sought to destroy them. I will not let them win.
He bared down as his faceless victim shifted and blurred. He glimpsed red hair as the smell of strawberries pierced through the stench of blood. Cole blinked to clear his mind of the image, but the woman… no, Lexi didn’t go away.
A fist hit him square in the jaw. It snapped his head back at the same time it knocked away the remaining dregs of his nightmare and threw him back into reality.
He wasn’t strangling some nameless opponent; he was strangling… Lexi!
With a shout, he threw himself away from her and rolled across the bed. Her wheezing, choking sounds followed him. Even more than the blood and death of the war, he knew those sounds would haunt him for the rest of his days.
“Fuck, fuck, FUCK!” he snarled as he launched to his feet.
Turning back toward her, he watched as she rolled across the bed and slid off the other side with a hand on her throat. He didn’t recall moving, but suddenly he was around the bed and going toward her as she huddled against the wall. Her fingers touched her temple before pulling away.
He spotted a red lump on her forehead along with what looked like a bit of silver. He glanced at the bed frame; she must have hit her head on it when she fell off the bed. She rubbed at the mark, and the silver vanished, but the lump remained.
When she saw him coming, she held out her palm to stop him. The wild beat of her heart and the pungent stench of her terror froze him.
“Shit, Lexi. Shit! I didn’t…. I wasn’t…. I didn’t mean to hurt you. I would never….”
His next words froze in his mouth. Cole couldn’t say he would never harm her when he just had, but he hadn’t meant to.
Kneeling in front of her, he ached to draw her into his arms as her striking green eyes studied him warily. He didn’t reach for her and instead rested his fingers on the ground.
“I would never hurt you on purpose,” he said.
He’d cut off his hand before he ever hurt her on purpose, but that hand had also left red welts along the delicate column of her throat. When he leaned closer to her, she shied away from him, and he recoiled.
“And who is going to protect her from you?”
“Who indeed, brother?”
Sahira and Brokk’s words ran through his mind as he gazed at her. He’d promised to keep her safe from Malakai, but he was the one who did this to her.
He slammed his hand onto the floor. “Fuck!”
Her eyes widened, but she didn’t recoil from him again; even still, more waves of self-hatred swamped him. He should be trying to calm her; he was making things worse.
“Lexi,” he whispered. “I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to…. I would never do this to you on purpose. I swear, I would never do this on purpose. I….” He glanced at the windows as a crashing wave of thunder shook the house.
His nightmare rushed back to him; only it wasn’t a nightmare. At one time, it was as real as the storm raging outside. He’d stood, covered in blood, on that field. The thick liquid had clogged his nose and filled his mouth as he hacked his way through so many.
When the falling bodies littered the field, he climbed over the growing mound they created. He lost himself to the bloodlust as he sought to survive, but he didn’t let the lycan part of himself take control.
He relied on his fae magic, superior strength, and fighting skills to carry him through the battle. However, knowing she was in danger—even if he was the threat—caused the beast to prowl beneath the surface. His claws scraped the wooden floor as they lengthened and retracted.
“It won’t happen again,” he said as he edged away from her. He’d make sure Malakai stayed away from her, but so would he. “You should go.”
But he didn’t want her to leave. He’d give anything to shelter her from the world as he lost himself to her kiss again.
She would chase away the nightmares, he was sure of it, but in the process, he might become her biggest nightmare. He refused to let that happen.
“What… what were you dreaming about?” she whispered in a hoarse voice.
The rawness of her voice made him wince, and he crept further away. His fangs extended as his teeth ground together.
If anyone else had dared to do this to her, he would have torn them to shreds, but he couldn’t destroy himself… no matter how badly he wanted to.
“It doesn’t matter,” he said.
“It does matter,” she whispered.
“No, it doesn’t.”
He rose, and when her eyes became saucers that latched onto his waist, he recalled his nudity.
Lexi forgot about her sore throat as she took him in. The thick wall of carved muscle was so deep across his stomach she could dip a fingertip into the hollows they created. A trail of black hair ran down from his belly button, and when she looked….
Her jaw almost became unhinged as she took in all of him. She should look away, but her attention remained riveted on the limp cock resting against his thigh.
She’d never seen a naked man before, and it was as fascinating as it was startling. Her hand fell away from her throat as she tried to process everything she was seeing.
It was rude to stare, but she remained riveted on him. And then her gaze traveled lower to his thighs and legs as he stood with his feet braced apart. Despite her every intention not to look again, her gaze returned to his dick before he turned away.
She found herself staring at his taut ass and wondering what it would feel like to grip it in her hands before he moved out of view. Once he was gone, the fire burned up her neck and face.
She’d been openly ogling him, and he’d seen her do it. What was the matter with her? He’d just been choking her, and she was pondering what it would be like to grab his ass.
The lack of oxygen to her brain had caused some damage.
Resting her hand against the wall, she took a deep breath and steadied the tremble in her legs before rising. As much as she’d love to remain huddled on the floor, she couldn’t do it.
However, she had to walk around the bed and in front of him to leave the room. She wasn’t sure her shaky legs would carry her that far.
As she waited to make sure she wouldn’t make an ass out of herself by falling on her face, she turned to discover him sitting on the other side of the bed with his hands on his knees.
More ciphers ran across his shoulder blades and down his back, where they stopped at the edge of his waist. He had far more of the markings than she’d realized.
How powerful is he?
Her attention was drawn away from the markings as his shoulders hunched forward and his head bowed. Misery radiated from him. If it wasn’t for her throbbing throat and the panic still thrumming through her, she would have climbed onto the bed, hugged him, and offered him some solace.
When she considered doing that, she flashed to him on top of her as his hand clamped around her throat. His mouth had twisted into a snarl that revealed his four fangs as she beat against him.
When his eyes flew open, she’d seen savagery, the likes of which she’d never witnessed before, in their silver depths. She’d also seen an emptiness that turned her blood to ice.
Before, when he looked at her, she always felt seen. But when he was choking her, he looked straight through her to something else. She’d realized he could kill her without knowing it was her.
Her struggles had increased, and she’d beat against him, but it hadn’t lessened his hold. It wasn’t until she landed a blow that shot his head back that he emerged from the grip of whatever controlled him.
She saw the clearing in his eyes and the devastation on his face when he realized what he was doing before he released her.
And now, she saw the dejected despair enshrouding him. Whatever he’d been dreaming about, it still haunted him, and so did his actions.
Still, she couldn’t stay here. He’d nearly killed her.
Her gaze traveled to the doorway as she edged around the bed. She couldn’t bring herself to look at him as she compelled herself not to run for the door.
He’d leave tomorrow. She did not doubt it. Even if Brokk weren’t ready for travel, he would go after the events of this night.
She ignored the sadness accompanying this realization. It would be better if he left. They should stop this treacherous game they played, but she didn’t want him to go.
She told herself she wouldn’t look back, but when her hand fell on the knob, she couldn’t stop her gaze from returning to him. His shoulders tensed as another round of thunder boomed throughout the room.
Darkness descended before lightning illuminated the room in a series of flashes. She recalled listening to the dragons as they ravaged the land. They sounded like this, and their fire had flashed over the walls the same way the lightning did.
Then she recalled his reaction when she asked him if the war was horrible. She remembered his hesitation before speaking and the anguish on his face.
It had been the look of a man who had committed and experienced atrocities she could never imagine. It had been the look of a man who hadn’t been broken by those atrocities, but they had forever altered him.
She hadn’t known Cole before the war, but she had no doubt he wasn’t the same man now as he was then.
How could he be?
He’d lost most of his family during the war and more than a few friends.
Her hand fell away from the knob as he remained sitting with his shoulders hunched forward, his head bowed, and his hands gripping his knees. He’d terrified her tonight, but she couldn’t bring herself to walk away from him while he was like this.
After Orin, she should have learned her lesson about trying to help others, especially the dark fae, but she found herself creeping toward him. Her mind screamed at her to run; this was a bad idea, but her heart and her feet propelled her onward.
He wasn’t Orin. He wasn’t an asshole who would turn on her like a rabid dog.
This was Cole. This was the man she’d spent the past few days getting to know better as they shared books and discussed their lives. This was the man who made her feel alive every time he touched her.
She briefly contemplated those who became shadow kissed before pushing them aside. It was a fear for a different time. This moment was only for them.
She would have asked him again what he was dreaming about when he attacked her, but she already knew the answer. He was lost to the nightmare of war, and she so badly wanted to find him.
When she stopped before him, his shoulders tensed as if he expected a blow and his hands tightened on his knees.
Unsure of what to do, she remained where she was. She’d been so certain while crossing the room, but now doubt wiggled its way in to fester at her mind.
He was a powerful, immortal being who was well versed in all the realms, and she was… well, she was her. She lived and worked on her small manor, her life revolved around her family, and she’d only ever left the mortal realm once in her life.
What could she possibly offer him?
Lightning flashed around the room again, and when he lifted his head, his silver eyes met hers. In his gaze, she saw such a mixture of distress and hope that melted her doubts.
He was the most powerful being she’d ever encountered, yet there was something broken about him, something she longed to heal. She wasn’t entirely sure how to do that, but some instinctive part of her told her she could.
She was a simple, not-so-powerful immortal, but she could offer him exactly what he needed…. She could help him heal.
When she cupped his cheek in her palm, his beard rubbed against her skin.
“Go, Lexi,” he said gruffly.
Instead of going, she lifted his face and bent to kiss him. For a second, she worried he would turn away, but he didn’t. Instead, his mouth was a grim, flat line against hers as he remained unmoving on the bed.
She’d made a mistake; she was making a fool of herself. She’d overestimated their connection, and he was about to pull away, laugh at her, and tell her to get out. He would remember her as the stupid fool who had been a game while he waited for his brother to heal.
If he remembered her at all.
The possibility he was toying with her had never occurred to her before. He was dark fae, but he’d come across as extremely honest.
She’d believed the passion behind his kisses and touch was real and not part of some game he was playing to pass the time. However, as he remained unmoving against her, she couldn’t help thinking she’d made a gigantic mistake.
She was starting to pull away when his arms encircled her waist. She had no time to react before he pulled her between his thighs. His hand slid up her back, his lips melted against hers, and he took possession of her mouth.
All possibility of making a huge mistake vanished when his tongue stroked her lips. It slipped inside her mouth, where it created a firestorm inside her.
Her fingers bit into his thick shoulders as he kissed her with a desperation she’d never experienced from him. His need for her was evident in every thrust of his tongue and the way his arms cinched around her.
He wasn’t going to let her go, and he wouldn’t be satisfied with a kiss this time. She’d known that as she crossed the room to him, but it hadn’t sunk into her conscious thoughts until now.
When she released the doorknob and returned to him, she’d known she was making a decision she could never take back. That she was walking a path she’d never walked before, and it could lead her straight off a cliff.
He would most likely break her heart, but at least she would get to experience that part of life. She would at least know what it was like to have him hold her and feel his body moving against hers.
His hand slid up her back to her nape before rising to entangle in her hair. Apprehension coiled inside her. He was so different from her, so much more experienced, and so sure of everything, while she was fumbling her way blindly forward.
When she returned to him, she’d hoped to keep him from drowning in a sea of memories and despair while trying to experience more of life. She was completely out of her depth here, but when his other hand slid down to cup her ass, some of her trepidation vanished as desire bloomed.
He should push her away and order her to run. He’d nearly killed her tonight, but now that she was in his arms, he wasn’t going to let her go.
Refusing to let her go made him a selfish prick, but he wouldn’t part from her. He’d always been a selfish prick, and he wasn’t about to change when he was holding the biggest temptation he’d ever encountered in his arms.
He pushed aside her robe and his hand bunched in her T-shirt as he pulled it up. When he slid his hand down to cup her ass again, his cock became rock-hard as his fingers traced the lacy edge of her underwear.
He slid his fingers over those edges before tugging her underwear down to cup her firm ass. She was so right and beautiful, and he couldn’t believe he was holding her. After what he’d done to her tonight, she should hate him, but instead, she’d come to him.
Growing frustrated with her underwear, he carefully sliced them from her silken skin, and the ruined material fell to the floor. Sensing her uncertainty, he cupped her ass again before sliding his hand down and between her legs.
He would keep her so aroused she wouldn’t have a chance to change her mind. She gasped as she swayed toward him. His fingers slipped between her thighs and touched upon the wetness spreading between her legs.
He’d considered himself hard before, but now his dick throbbed with its need for release. Plucking her from the ground, he lifted her and settled her on his lap.
He could be inside her in seconds, something he wanted more than his next breath, but he didn’t take her. Instead, he planned to cherish every bit of her and this moment before entering her.
By the time he finished teasing her, she would be mindless and panting with need. When he finally did enter her, he would ensure the pain of her first time was minimal.
He teased her clit until she trembled against him. He teased her until her legs were trembling around him.
Rising from the bed, he broke the kiss while he lifted her. She locked her legs around his waist and clung to him as their eyes met.
The hunter and emerald green mixture of hers had darkened, and her pupils were dilated. Her lips, swollen from his kisses, were as lush as her. She licked them as her gaze fell to his mouth.
“You should run, Lexi,” he said.
He didn’t know where the words came from; he certainly hadn’t expected to utter them, but he had to give her one last chance to leave. She had to realize that once he possessed her, he would never let her go.
It had been a while since he fed, and the fae was hungry, though he wouldn’t take from her tonight. Tonight, it would be about her.
For the first time in his life, he planned to deny himself. The realization would have been shocking, but he was far too lost in her to absorb it fully.
When her beautiful green eyes continued to hold his, he didn’t see any sign of her changing her mind. There was apprehension in her gaze, but it wasn’t of him. How she didn’t fear him, he didn’t know, but it only made him care for her more.
And he did care for her, he realized with a start. He didn’t want to protect her because she was Del’s daughter; he wanted to protect her because she was his.
Excitement pulsed through him at the realization. She was his, and he was not going to let her go.
He squeezed her ass before turning to lay her on the bed. When he set her down and stepped back to gaze at her, her eyes fell to his erection.
He thought she might change her mind and bolt then, but she bit her lip and looked to him again. Her fangs had extended until the sharp points showed over her bottom lip.
With tender care, he traced the tip of one of those fangs, and when it pricked his thumb, he ran the blood across her lips. When her tongue darted out to taste his blood, a spark of hunger flared in her eyes.
He smiled as he pulled the robe from her before gripping the bottom of her T-shirt and sliding it up to reveal her belly. Tugging it higher, he exposed her pert breasts before pulling the shirt from her.
He tossed the clothing aside and gazed down at her. She was long and lean, and her time working on the manor had toned her body. However, she still possessed shapely thighs and luscious curves that begged to be explored. And he was more than eager to do exactly that.
His mouth watered as he climbed onto the bed beside her and cupped one of her breasts. It filled his palm and spilled over a little as he ran his thumb around her nipple before bending to suck it into his mouth.
Her fingers entwined in his hair, and she pulled him closer. He ran his other hand down her stomach. It slipped between her legs where he rubbed her clit before dipping a finger into her. She arched beneath him as he turned his mouth to her other breast.
Her hips rocked as she fucked his hand until her breath came faster. Releasing her breast, he lifted his head to gaze at her as her head fell back.
While she was so focused on the pleasure he gave her, he slipped another finger into her. He stretched her further in preparation for his invasion when it came.
As she rode his hand, he drank in the beautiful sight of her while he pushed her closer and closer to orgasm. When she came apart, he muffled her cry with his kiss as the walls of her sheath contracted around his fingers.
He broke the kiss and leaned back to savor her beauty as her eyes fluttered open. A sexy smile curved her swollen lips while the lightning bolts illuminated her sun-kissed, silken skin and exquisite beauty.
She was the most stunning woman he’d ever seen, and she was his. The wolf within him bellowed this knowledge over and over again.
Always the more subtle part of himself, he wasn’t used to having the primal lycan part of himself seeking to take control, but it had been asserting its dominance since she walked into his life.
He had no idea what would happen if the beast broke free, but he was willing to find out if it meant making her his.
Lexi floated on a haze of passion as Cole remained kneeling beside her with a look of wonder and something more on his face. She couldn’t quite place what that something more was —confusion, disbelief, a dawning understanding that seemed out of place—but when his silver eyes met hers, the wildness in them made her breath catch.
He was magnificent, powerful, and on the verge of losing control. After what transpired earlier, and her still sore throat, that should frighten her. However, when his fingers skimmed her belly and the tips of his claws grazed her skin, she felt no fear of him.
He’d been lost to a nightmare earlier—no, not a nightmare, he was trapped in a memory when she tried to wake him. He was with her completely now. And he would never physically harm her while awake.
He might end up breaking her heart, but that would be her fault as much as his. She’d walked into this knowing what he was, yet she was still here.
“You should have run, Lexi,” he said in a gravelly voice distorted by his fangs.
She probably should have run, but she hadn’t, and she was glad. There was nowhere else she’d rather be.
Gripping her legs, he shifted until he knelt between them. When he leaned over her, the thick wall of his muscle and the heat of his body encompassed her. He propped his hands beside her head as he held himself over her.
His silver eyes flickered, and for a second, she was staring into their Persian blue depths again. There was something so open and honest about that gaze, something so vulnerable it dug its way into her heart, and though her heart might end up shattered, she would never run from him.
And then the blue was gone and the silver was back. She ran her fingers over his high cheekbones as he lifted one hand and grasped his shaft to guide it into her. The head of it parted her and pushed inside.
Biting her lip, she kept her attention focused on him as sweat dampened his skin and the powerful muscles surrounding her vibrated with his barely leashed restraint. As he moved deeper into her, she tried to ignore the discomfort their joining created.
And just when she believed he was going to bury himself inside her, he stopped moving and put his hand beside her head again. They stared at each other before he bent and reclaimed her lips.
The tender caress of his tongue was so different than his demanding kisses earlier that she didn’t know how to respond at first, but when his tongue entwined with hers, Lexi relaxed beneath him.
Her arms slid up to wrap around his shoulders, and she pulled him closer. She marveled at the differences between them. He was so unyielding and massive.
He made her feel small and fragile but also cherished and safe as his thumb rubbed her cheek and the tenderness of his kiss dug its way deeper into her heart.
Her fingers bit into his back, and as she adjusted to having him partially inside her, she lifted her hips invitingly toward him. She wouldn’t accept anything less than all of him.
When she relaxed beneath him, Cole pushed past the barrier of her virginity and buried himself deep inside her. She stiffened as her fingers bit into his back.
He continued to kiss her and tried to get her to relax again by stroking her flesh while her tight sheath gripped his shaft. The lycan part of him demanded to take possession of her, claim her, and own her.
It craved her with a savagery he could never unleash. If it broke free, he would hurt her, and he could never do that again.
However, the demand of the lycan was so strong that the ravenous, dark fae part of him ceded control to the lycan, something it had never done before.
And that cessation of control caused the lycan’s need to grow. It wanted to mark every part of her as it claimed her completely.
He labored to control his more savage urges as he remained unmoving within her. If he did to her what his instincts screamed at him to do, not only might he possibly destroy her, but he would also terrify her.
He couldn’t let himself go, but he could relish every second of their time together, and he planned to do exactly that as he slid a hand under her ass and lifted it to give him better access. Her fingers entwined in his hair as he started moving within her.
Her body yielded to his as she relaxed further and gave herself completely over to him. She was so supple, so beautiful, and so amazingly right in his arms.
Yes, she was his, and no matter what happened, he was never going to let her go.
His cock swelled as he resisted sinking his fangs into his mate.
Mate!
The realization didn’t hit him over the head like a hammer. In fact, it wasn’t as astounding as it should have been. Because the dark fae part of him had always been the more dominant one, he’d never expected to encounter his mate.
Yet, here she was in his arms, and the lycan had taken control for the first time in his life. And it felt as natural as the rain beating against the windows. She belonged in his arms, and he would do everything in his power to keep her there.
Growling, he thrust into her. He kept the worst of his impulses leashed as the wolf savored the exquisite pleasure of its mate.
Once the pain faded, all Lexi felt was the joy of their joining and the awe of being with him. She’d never known life could offer such an amazing experience as this, and she couldn’t get enough of it.
He enveloped her in his arms, and lifting her off the bed, he braced his knees apart as he kept her embedded on him. Wrapping her legs around his waist, she cleaved to him while he guided her up and down his shaft.
Something started to build within her. She recognized the pressure, the excitement, and need of a building orgasm, but this was so much more intense than anything she’d experienced before.
She clung to him as the scent of allspice and something musky enveloped her. She buried her face in his neck as the pressure building within her released. Her back bowed as waves of ecstasy crashed through her.
She stifled her cries against his neck as the very fabric of her splintered apart until she was only pieces of the woman she once was. And as those pieces started to reform themselves, she realized she would never be the same again.
When her sheath clenched around his shaft and she cried out against his flesh, Cole wrapped his hand around her neck. A tingle ran down his spine, and he came with a shout that the storm drowned out.
He held her as she went limp in his arms while more lightning illuminated the room. He watched the flashes as he cradled her and suppressed the pacing, irate lycan denied its full claim and the famished fae stirring to life.
He’d never come so hard in his life, but he wasn’t completely fulfilled. He hadn’t claimed his mate, and he wouldn’t until he discussed it with her. She was not a lycan; she wouldn’t feel the call of the mate bond like he did.
She was part vampire, and they had fated consorts. She might feel the call of that, but he couldn’t consider that while he was grappling to control his darker nature.
Keeping himself restrained was easier to do when her naked body was flush against his. It didn’t matter that he wanted more; she was with him, which was enough for now.
Laying her back on the bed, he gazed down at her exquisite body as he kissed her again and slowly withdrew from her. He’d already started to harden again when he pulled out; she wasn’t ready for that.
There would be plenty of other nights where he would take her over and over again; he would make sure of it. This would not be one of those nights as she needed time to heal.
She groaned in disappointment when he pulled out of her, and he kissed her again.
Cole held her closer as Lexi nestled against his chest. Thunder continued to roll, but he no longer heard the sounds of battle.
Instead, all he felt was a sense of peace as the rain plastered the windows and the wind howled across the land. This peace was something he’d never experienced before in his life. For the first time, he felt content and settled, and so happy he couldn’t stop grinning.
His entire life, the dark fae had dominated the lycan part of him, but now that Lexi was in his arms, he realized the lycan was making itself known more than he realized.
The dark fae had dominated power-wise, but he hadn’t realized the incessant, churning emptiness within him could be silenced. He’d always assumed that was what drove the dark fae from one partner to the next, but now, it was gone, and he now knew it had been coming from the lycan part of him.
She’d calmed that loneliness.
It was not completely silenced; the lycan still clamored to claim her to be completely pacified, but it was quieter and more content, and it would stop completely once he officially made her his.
But that could wait. She was just learning the ways of a man and woman; he would not tell her about his intentions to claim her for all eternity yet. He would do it soon, but for now, he intended for her to enjoy what was developing between them without any added pressure.
As he held her, he recalled watching as she wandered into the moon room. The luna flowers had reacted to her as if she were part lycan; they must have sensed she was his mate before he did. They’d been seeking to welcome her because they’d known she would become an integral part of his life.
He held her closer as he kissed the top of her head. The sweet scent of strawberries filled his nose and further calmed the lycan. The dark fae was still hungry, but it could also wait.
He wouldn’t feed on her without her permission, and even if she didn’t give it, there wouldn’t be any other women for him.
Lexi floated on a haze of euphoria as she remained cradled safely in his arms. She’d never felt so protected or cherished before. She wasn’t sure how long this feeling would last as he would eventually move on, but she was completely content to enjoy it for now.
The solid beat of his heart beneath her ear caused her to smile. She caressed the wall of muscle as she ran her fingers across his chest. She’d never dreamed of experiencing such a rush of pleasure or such wondrous contentment afterward.
She never wanted to leave this bed or his arms.
But reality was returning, and so was the realization she was wading into dangerous territory. She’d told herself not to develop feelings for him, but it was already too late. Even if it resulted in a shattered heart, she would ride this adventure to the end.
Was this what it was like to be shadow kissed? The possibility made her mouth go dry. She couldn’t become like one of them.
“Cole?” she whispered.
“Yes?” he asked as he twirled a strand of her hair around his finger.
“Will I become one of the shadow kissed?”
His hand stilled on her hair. “No.”
“Are you sure?” She lifted her head so she could look up at him. “I don’t want to be one of them. I know….” She gulped. “I know it's what the dark fae sometimes do, and I… I… can’t be one of them.”
“Then you won’t be. The shadow kissed are like that because it’s what they crave. Yes, the dark fae help guide them there, but the choice is theirs to make. Some let the dark fae feed on them and go on with their lives, and others seek more. Instead of shutting those cravings down, they search out more and more until it consumes them.”
She pondered this as she tapped her fingers on his chest. “So, it's like some humans with their drugs?”
“Yes.”
After what she’d experienced with him, she could see how easy it would be to become consumed by the need for more. She’d hate to walk away from him, but she would choose that over being shadow kissed.
“So, I won’t become one of them?”
“Not unless you allow it,” he murmured as he nuzzled her temple with his lips. “The shadow kissed have to let us corrupt them. As long as you don’t allow it, you’ll be fine.”
He could be lying to her and playing one of the dark fae games, but she didn’t think so. She wouldn’t fool herself into believing he was a kind, compassionate man, but he wasn’t a liar.
“Okay,” she said.
She stifled a yawn and her eyes closed. She was starting to doze when she recalled what happened earlier. They flew open again. She felt safe in his arms, but he was awake now.
What would happen if he fell asleep again?
That dose of cold reality smothered some of her happiness, but she refused to let it ruin the joy she’d discovered in him. The rain ticked against the glass as it pelted the windows.
He shifted to pull the blankets more securely around her. “You should sleep.”
“I’m okay,” she murmured as she stifled a yawn.
He clasped her hand and stilled it against his chest before kissing her head and her cheek. She warmed to the tender gesture and lifted her mouth to his.
When Brokk was better, he would leave, and she might never see him again. Until then, she planned to enjoy every second of what little time they had together.
She started to melt into him again when he pulled away and kissed the tip of her nose.
“Rest,” he commanded and tipped his head back to rest it against the headboard.
She tilted her head up to take in the vast expanse of his chest and dark ciphers. She traced his markings before her hand fell onto his stomach and her eyes closed again. Another clap of thunder caused them to fly open once more.
If he fell asleep and the thunder caused him to dream of the war again, what would happen?
When her lashes fluttered open to tickle his chest again, Cole realized what was keeping her awake… fear. He ground his teeth together as self-hatred swelled within him. The last thing he wanted was for her to be nervous around him, but he couldn’t blame her for being wary.
“Go to sleep, Lexi. I’ll stay awake,” he promised.
“I’m not that tired,” she murmured.
“Yes, you are. Get some rest, and I’ll keep watch.”
“That’s not fair,” she protested.
“You’re safe with me, and I’m going to make sure you stay that way. Rest.”
He ran his fingers through her thick, silken hair and let it cascade across his chest as he marveled at the different shades of red within the striking color. When he glided his fingers down her back, he delighted in the small shiver it elicited from her.
“You have to rest too,” she said.
“I’m fine,” he said.
He let her hair fall, settled a hand on her ass, and gave it a small squeeze. His cock stirred again, but his concern for her shoved aside his growing lust. She was not ready for what he desired to do to her again.
Lexi rested her hands on his chest and started to rise. She hated leaving the security of his arms, but she couldn’t stay here if it meant he spent the rest of the night sitting up, awake, in the dark.
His bright blue eyes met hers as his hand returned to her hair. He brushed it away from her temple before cupping her nape.
“You’re beautiful,” he whispered.
Lexi thrilled at his words as he kissed her again and pulled away. She almost moaned in disappointment but managed to stifle it.
“And you’re extremely handsome.” The words were out of her mouth before she realized she was about to say them. She hated the blush burning across her cheeks.
He grinned at her. “I’m glad you think so. Now, are you going to sleep or not?”
“I should return to my room. You need to sleep.”
His arms locked around her, and he pulled her firmly against his chest. “No. I want you to stay with me far more than I want to sleep.”
“But—”
“I want you to stay here… unless you’d prefer to go.”
“No, I wouldn’t.”
“Then relax and stay here with me. I promise you’ll be safe.”
“I know I will.”
And she did know that. Despite what happened earlier, she trusted him not to hurt her again.
Cole held her firmly against his chest as she rested her head on him once more. Her thick lashes tickled his skin as her eyes closed. This time, they didn’t open again.
He held her close as he listened to the rain. A dull throbbing in his jaw drew his attention to it. He rubbed it absently as he recalled the blow that propelled him out of his nightmare. He smiled; his mate packed one hell of a punch.
Her body relaxed against him, and her breathing slowed as sleep claimed her. Even after what happened earlier, she trusted him, and he would do whatever it took to make sure he earned her trust.
He might never sleep again, but it would be worth it if it meant he got to hold her every night. Because, if he had his way, she would be in his bed every night for the rest of eternity.
Lexi spent most of the next morning walking around in a haze of euphoria. She finally understood what someone meant when they said they were walking on cloud nine as she turned the horses loose and cleaned the stalls.
She fully expected that cloud to burst sometime soon, but for now, she was content to ride it.
When she returned to the house, she showered and changed before going to the kitchen to make her breakfast. Thankfully, Sahira was nowhere around.
She couldn’t handle her aunt’s questions right now, and she knew they would come as she couldn’t get rid of the stupid grin on her face.
After eating her breakfast, she went to the library and settled on her chair to read. Her gaze kept traveling to the fireplace. She’d done a good job at shoving Orin out of her mind, but after last night, she couldn’t deny the guilt nagging at her.
Orin was a complete asshole, but she didn’t want to see anything bad happen to him. However, after last night, she couldn’t help but feel guilty over harboring him beneath her home. Cole and Brokk were hunting him, and she knew where he was.
Not for much longer. The first chance she got, she was going to get him out of her tunnels, and she didn’t care if he wanted to go or not. He didn’t have a choice anymore.
Or maybe she’d get lucky and he’d find his way out. He was probably pretty pissed she hadn’t returned yet. Until she got the chance to kick him out, she would have to deal with her guilt over keeping this from Cole.
She did so by ignoring it.
Almost an hour passed before Cole entered the room, closed the doors behind him, and strode toward her. It was the first time he’d shut them, and it would draw attention to them, but she didn’t care as he prowled toward her in his too-small clothes and bare feet.
There was something almost feral about him as he approached. Her heart picked up, and her skin prickled as her body responded to the hunger he emanated.
He stopped before her and, with tender care, slid his arms under her and lifted her from the chair. He settled her on his lap as he sat on the chair. The intimate, possessive gesture surprised her.
She didn’t know what she’d expected from him today, but now that he’d settled her across his legs, with his arms around her, she realized a part of her had worried he’d pretend the whole thing never happened or ignore her.
She wasn’t sure which one of those things would be more painful.
He’d been dressed and about to leave the room when she woke this morning. He bent to kiss her and told her he was going to check on Brokk before leaving. Things had been normal, even sweet, but she still hadn’t known what to expect from him.
“How are you feeling?” he asked as he lifted a strand of her damp hair and twirled it around his finger.
“Happy,” she admitted.
Maybe it was wrong to be so honest with him—dark fae weren’t known to care about other’s feelings—but he’d asked, and that was more than she would have expected from a dark fae.
When he smiled at her, the twinkle in his eyes made her heart do a strange little stutter before melting. It wasn’t fair that he was so damn irresistible.
“How are you feeling?” she asked.
“Happy,” he replied.
Lexi’s mouth parted at this admission. Was he happy because of her?
She didn’t dare ask him.
Then his smile faded as his eyes fell to her neck and the faint bruises marring her skin. They were fading as she healed, but his fingers trembled when he rested them against the marks. At least the welt on her head was gone.
“This will never happen again,” he vowed.
“You were dreaming about the war, weren’t you?” she asked.
She held her breath as she waited for his reply. Would he admit the truth or deny it, or maybe she was wrong completely and something else had pushed him to such a point last night.
“Yes,” he said.
“Do you dream about it often?”
His eyes met and held hers as he replied. “Not since coming here.”
“Why not?”
“Who knows.”
She suspected he knew, but she didn’t push him on it. He’d been far more open with her than she’d ever expected, and she wasn’t going to take the chance of him shutting down.
“The thunder and lightning must have set the nightmares off last night,” he said as he stroked the bruises on her neck.
“I’m fine,” she assured him when self-loathing filled his gaze.
His fingers stilled on her. “Are you sore?”
“No, I told you already; the bruises are almost gone.”
“I didn’t mean here.” He tapped her neck before running his fingers down her breasts. He skimmed her belly and slid his hand between her legs. She gasped when he cupped her. “I meant here.”
It took her a minute to sputter a response as fire burned her cheeks. “I was earlier, but not anymore.”
“Good,” he said as he caressed her through her jeans.
Lexi lost herself to his touch until she was panting and her body begged for release. Undoing her jeans, she helped slide them down her thighs, and she kicked them off with her feet.
Leaning back, his eyes turned to silver when they latched on to her lacy, purple underwear. She’d selected the sheer pair in the hopes he would like them. It was obvious he did as he tugged them off.
She shouldn’t let this happen here, but she couldn’t bring herself to stop it. When he tugged her shirt up, she lifted her arms as he pulled it over her head. He smiled when he saw her bra matched her underwear.
“The doors,” she managed to pant out when he removed her from his lap and settled her on the chair before kissing her belly.
“I locked them,” he said as he left a trail of kisses across her skin.
A shiver ran through her when she realized this was what he anticipated when he entered the room. Making his way steadily lower, he slid off the chair and knelt on the rug. He grasped her legs and spun her toward him.
She didn’t know what he intended until he slid her legs over his shoulders. She started to pull away, but he gripped her ass and held her in place. His eyes burned as they met hers.
“I’ve imagined tasting you since the moment I saw you,” he said.
Her eyes widened at this revelation, and before she could protest, he lowered his mouth to her core. At first, she was so stunned, she couldn’t react.
And then his tongue delved deep inside her. She remained rigid for a few seconds, but his tongue melted any of her uncertainty about such an act.
Forgetting all about her shyness, her fingers entwined in his hair as she pulled him closer. His short beard rubbed the inside of her thighs in the most delicious of ways. He kept one hand on her ass while the other roamed up her body to cup one of her breasts.
Lexi arched into him as his mouth and hand worked their magic over her body. Her heels dug into his back, and her fingers gripped his ears as he brought her to climax. She bit her bottom lip to stifle her cries.
She was still floating on a cloud of bliss when he lowered her legs from his shoulders and rose. With deft movements, he quickly shed his clothes.
Though she’d seen all of him last night, she still couldn’t get over how powerful and large he was. Gripping her hips, he shifted her on the chair and turned her, so her hands rested on the chair arm.
Lexi wasn’t entirely sure what he intended until he stepped behind her and lifted her hips. His dick slid inside, and he buried himself deep within her. Unlike last night, her body swiftly adjusted to having him inside her.
Her fingers bit into the thick cushion of the overstuffed armchair as he introduced her to this new position. There was something so thrilling about having him behind her, controlling her, and demanding more that it aroused her even more.
As he pulled slowly out of her before thrusting deep again, she closed her eyes and gave herself over to him. He guided her hips as her breasts swayed, and his movements became more demanding.
“Fuck,” he groaned. “You’re so fucking hot and tight, and you’re mine.”
That last word caused her eyes to fly open, but as her mind scrambled to understand what he meant, he reached around to cup her breast with one hand while the other slid between her legs. She forgot all about her shock at his words as he caressed her clit.
Her back bowed, and her head fell back as she came again. Cole plunged into her once more before shuddering. She felt the pulse of his cock as he released his seed.
He sagged against her and pressed his cheek to her back before kissing the hollow between her shoulder blades. His mouth and tongue left a trail of heat down her body as he moved steadily lower.
With tender care, he pulled out of her and shifted his hold so he could slide onto the chair. He pulled her onto his lap once more. She curled up against his chest and rested her head on his shoulder. Beneath her hand, his heart raced.
“That was… nice,” she murmured.
His laughter startled her. She lifted her head to take him in as his chest rumbled and his blue eyes twinkled in amusement.
“You might be the death of me, and the best you can say is ‘that was nice.’”
“The death of you?” she asked.
“Yes, but what a fantastic way to go.”
“Very true,” she agreed, and he laughed again. She nestled against him again as his arms enveloped her. “I’m not on….”
Damn it, she was starting to blush again. She tried to suppress the heat scorching her cheeks and failed miserably.
If she was going to have sex, then she was going to discuss these things without blushing. She told herself this, but it didn’t change anything as her face burned.
“I’m not on any kind of birth control,” she muttered.
“I am.”
She lifted her head again. “You are?”
“Yes. I get a potion from a warlock that I take once a month.” There was no amusement on his face or in his eyes as he gazed solemnly at her. “I won’t leave a trail of children behind me.”
She gulped. A trail of children. She was concerned about the possibility of one child, and he was concerned with having many of them… with numerous women.
This realization doused some of her contentment. He’s a dark fae!
She would be only one of many to him, and she had to keep reminding herself of this. While she was lost in a sea of happiness, he would move on and probably never recall his time here.
Sorrow bloomed in her chest, but she pushed it aside. She could mourn the loss of what she’d discovered here when he was gone, but she wouldn’t turn into a melancholy mess while he was still here.
“Have you fed from me?” she asked as she decided to change to subject.
“You would know if I had, and I wouldn’t do it without your permission.”
She frowned at him. “Aren’t you hungry?”
“Yes, but you’re just starting to learn the pleasure a man and woman can give each other. I’m not going to add my need to feed into the mix. That will come in time.”
“In time?”
“Yes, we have plenty of it.”
“You think Brokk will have to stay here for a lot longer?”
“No, I think he’ll be ready to leave tomorrow, and I’ll escort him back to the Gloaming, but I will return.” And then his eyes narrowed on her. “Unless you would prefer it if I didn’t come back.”
“Of course not!” she blurted before she could stop herself. “But.…”
Her words trailed off as she tried to think of what to say.
“But?” he prodded.
“But you’re dark fae.”
“I’m also lycan and man.”
“What does that mean?”
“It means that I’m coming back.”
He stated this with such authority that she didn’t know how to respond. She’d never allowed herself to entertain the possibility he might decide to stay, but she couldn’t help feeling doubtful.
“For how long?” she asked.
Cole buried his irritation over her disbelief. He knew the reputation of the dark fae—it was well-deserved and earned, but that wasn’t who he was.
But wasn’t it? It’s who he’d always been, who he’d always planned to be… until she walked into his life.
It wasn’t who he was anymore, and he hated her doubt in him.
When he saw the uncertainty in her gaze, his annoyance faded. She wasn’t asking him these things because she wanted him to leave. She was asking because she was afraid.
“What are you afraid of, Lexi?” he asked.
Her mouth parted, and her eyes darted away from him. “I’m not… I’m not sure what you want from me.”
“I want you. I thought I’d made that pretty clear.”
“But for how long?”
Her words were like a punch to his gut. He wasn’t going to leave her, and he needed to make that clear. But before he could respond, a knock rattled the doors.
“Lexi!” Sahira called in a voice tinged with panic. “Lexi, are you in there?”
“Yes,” she said.
An oof of air escaped him when she planted her hand on his stomach and pushed herself up.
“Sorry,” she muttered as she scrambled out of his lap.
He almost pulled her back as he missed holding her, but she’d already scurried away from him. Cole rose as Lexi hastily tugged on her clothes.
He hated this interruption, but he started to dress too. Something about Sahira’s tone didn’t sit well with him. He was pulling on his jeans when a thunderous boom shook the earth.
Lexi released a startled cry and staggered to the side when the boom quaked the house. He caught her hand and steadied her before she toppled over the chair. Her eyes flew to his as a growl swelled within him.
He didn’t know what was going on, but he would destroy it if it threatened her.
He tugged his jeans on but ignored his shirt as he stalked toward the doors. He glanced back to make sure Lexi was dressed before he unlocked and opened the doors. Sahira took a startled step back as her gaze roamed over his chest.
There was no doubt about what transpired between them inside that room, and he was glad of that. Sahira didn’t want him to be a part of Lexi’s life, but she didn’t have a choice, and she would learn that.
He turned back to Lexi as she hurried toward them, straightening her shirt. She kept her eyes averted from Sahira’s as her cheeks burned. He stretched a hand back to her as another boom quaked the house.
When a sound like the earth being torn apart reverberated through the air, he grabbed Lexi’s arm and pulled her against his side. The blush vanished from her face, and her skin paled when she looked at him.
“What is going on?” he demanded of Sahira as he embraced Lexi protectively against him.
Sahira’s shocked expression vanished as she gave him a steely look. Beneath her fury, he saw a flash of unease before she covered it up.
“Dragons,” she said.
An uneasy feeling coiled in his stomach as another boom rattled the windows, and from somewhere in the manor, glass shattered. Sahira turned and strode toward the front door as the shrieking bellow of a dragon rent the air.
“Shit,” he snarled.
He wanted to push Lexi back into the library and shelter her from whatever was happening, but he wouldn’t part from her. Instead, he kept her tucked against him as they followed Sahira outside.
The sun beat down on them, the sky was a crystalline blue, and the serenity of the day was broken only by the birds filling the sky. Another bellow drown out the cries of those birds.
He didn’t see any of the monstrous creatures until they turned the corner of the manor and one of the beasts soared into view. It swept low over the land with its fifty-foot wings spread wide, its head extended, and its tail out behind it.
The sun glinted off its red scales as a plume of fire erupted from its mouth and it rained destruction on the land. Chunks of earth flew up as it plowed a ditch into the fire-scorched ground. Pieces of wood shot into the air as trees and the marketplace's ramshackle buildings toppled beneath its onslaught.
When its fire went out, the dragon soared high into the sky. The sun created a glow around its wings as it hovered in the air.
Then it roared and dove toward the earth. Another wave of fire erupted from it. The marketplace was half a mile away, but Cole’s position allowed him to see that nothing remained of it.
“No!” Lexi gasped.
She jerked free of his arms and lunged forward. She ran toward the road as Sahira started after her. Cole caught her before she made it ten feet. He pressed her against his chest as she struggled in his grasp.
“There’s nothing you can do,” he told her.
“But… but… they didn’t do anything!” she protested as tears shone in her eyes. “It’s killing them, and they didn’t do anything!”
He despised her tears and the heaving breaths shaking her slender frame, but he couldn’t do anything to stop this. Not yet, anyway. But one day, he would end this.
He cradled her while the smoke rising from the burning remains choked out the sun. He didn’t care about the mortals and immortals at the market, he was tired of senseless violence, but their lives weren’t important.
What he cared about was what would happen if the Lord continued to unleash such destruction on Earth. Eventually, he would run out of things to destroy and turn his insanity on the Shadow Realms, including the Gloaming.
And Cole did care about immortals there. He’d already lost most of his family; he would not lose any more of them.
He also had Lexi to protect now. And no matter what he had to do, he would keep her safe.
“It doesn’t matter if they did something or not,” he said.
And that was completely true. It didn’t matter if the humans and immortals at the marketplace were innocent; if the Lord deemed them a threat, he would destroy them.
“Holy shit,” Brokk breathed as he arrived beside him. “What is going on?”
No one answered him; there was no reason to reply. He could see what was happening with his own two eyes.
The dragon released another roar before turning and swooping toward them. Cole held Lexi against his chest, but there wasn’t enough time to turn and flee with her. If the dragon decided to unleash its wrath on them, they couldn’t stop it.
Lexi ducked a little as the gigantic beast soared toward them. The beat of its wings kicked dirt up from the ground and fanned the flames of the marketplace fire as the screams of the wounded and dying filled the air.
So many wounded and dying. So many faces she knew. And they were burning.
She tried not to vomit as the scent of burning flesh mingled with the burning wood and earth stench. Her heart thumped a little faster, her mouth went dry, and she gripped Cole’s arms as she tried not to cower.
If it unleashed a wave of fire on them, they’d be crisp fried as soon as it hit them. And then the dragon soared over the top of them.
Despite its formidable power and the death it just unleashed, something was captivating about the ruthless beast. When it twisted to the side, the sun's angle turned its scales the color of blood.
She tried not to be awed by the thing, but she couldn’t stop her mouth from parting as she gazed at its underbelly. It was huge! It blocked the sky until it was all she could see.
When it flapped its wings, the wind it created blew her hair back from her face and plastered her clothes to her. Dirt swirled around them until the cascade of particles briefly blocked out the underbelly of the beast.
By the time the dust settled, the dragon was past them. She turned to track its movements as from one second to the next it vanished.
“Where did it go?” she breathed.
“It returned to Dragonia,” Sahira said.
Lexi stared at where it had vanished before shifting her attention back to the ravaged marketplace. People and immortals crowded the road as they fled the destruction, but there were a lot less of them than there should have been.
“We have to help them,” she said.
Cole studied the smoldering remains of the marketplace as he leaned his hand against the windowsill. The full moon was the only illumination over the ruined land.
In the dark of night, the glowing coals of the torched buildings looked like the eyes of some beast lying in wait to spring its trap. But then, that trap had already sprung.
He’d mistakenly believed that once the Lord won the war, he would stop unleashing his dragons. Cole hadn’t expected the insane man’s ruthless determination to wipe out anyone he perceived as an enemy.
The breeze drifting across the land carried with it the stench of fire and the faint aroma of burnt flesh. He started to close the window against the stench when a crow flitted down to perch on the sill.
He wasn’t surprised to see the bird; he’d sent a message to his father after they returned to the manor.
After the attack, Lexi insisted on going to the marketplace to see if they could help the survivors. By the time they reached the fires, any survivors had fled, and those who weren’t fortunate enough to be able to run were dead.
The unexpected attack hadn’t left much of a chance for survivors. Though he felt the distress emanating from her, Lexi kept her chin high and her shoulders back as they returned to the manor.
Once there, he led her to her room, and while she showered, he sent a letter to his father.
Now, that response had arrived.
He glanced back to where Lexi lay ensconced in her blanket. It had taken her a while to fall asleep, and she hadn’t spoken while she lay nestled in his arms.
He didn’t talk either. After what he witnessed today, the memories of the war were closer to the surface and raw. The only thing that helped ease the screams and the cloying scent of blood haunting his memories was holding her in his arms.
And so he’d kissed and held her, but he didn’t try to do anything more. Finally, she fell asleep in his arms, and when she did, he rose from the bed and walked over to stare out the window. After the events of today, he didn’t dare fall asleep with her in the room.
The crow dropped the letter on the windowsill. Cole lifted it and slid the window closed. He walked over to the chair in the corner of Lexi’s room and sat. He sank onto the cushion of the plush, baby blue chair and opened the note.
He recognized his father’s elegant scroll immediately. The Lord received word traitors were in the marketplace. He took the necessary quick and effective action.
Cole knew his father had a lot more to say about what happened today, but he couldn’t put them in a letter that might be intercepted. Cole crumpled the letter and threw it in the trash can only a few feet away from him.
He leaned back in the chair and clasped the arms of it as he contemplated his father’s response. Who told the Lord there were traitors in the marketplace?
Cole hadn’t seen any sign of such activity taking place there. Most mortals and immortals were too scared to do anything more than sell their wares and go home. But someone had put it in the Lord’s head that something more was going on there.
And there was also the chance the Lord never received any such word. It was just as likely he’d made it up so he could use it as an excuse for slaughtering a bunch of innocents. Though, he didn’t need any reasons; no one could stop him while he controlled the dragons, and there were far too many of those beasts to slaughter.
Even knowing all this, he kept picturing Malakai walking through the marketplace with that smug look on his face. Cole wouldn’t put it past the vampire to report traitors in the market just to watch it burn.
Cole had no way of knowing who was whispering about treachery in the Lord’s ears, but he suspected that the vampire had a hand in what happened today.
Malakai had done something to earn that amulet.
Cole drummed his fingers on the ends of the chair as he gazed around the room. Much like the woman who slept in the bed, there was something delicate and feminine about it. The curtains surrounding the windows were a pale blue that matched the covers pulled around her.
Pictures of her father and Sahira decorated the walls, and he found himself staring into Del’s grinning face. A small pang tugged at his heart; he missed that smile and the man who bore it.
He didn’t know how Del would react to his relationship with Lexi, but he doubted his friend would be thrilled. Del had gone out of his way to protect Lexi; he would not want her entwined with a man who was front and center in the war.
As much as he missed his friend, he also didn’t give a fuck what Del wanted for her. Cole was not giving her up.
When Lexi whimpered in her sleep, he padded across the cool, hardwood floor until he stood beside the bed. He pulled back the comforters and slid into bed beside her.
Tonight, she was the one having nightmares, and he despised it. What happened today never should have occurred. If there were traitors in the marketplace, then there were other ways to handle the situation, but the Lord was too far gone in his madness to see that.
Drawing Lexi into his arms, he kissed her temple. She murmured something before settling down and relaxing against him.
He was exhausted, but he wouldn’t sleep tonight. As long as he held her, he didn’t trust himself to sleep, but he wasn’t going to let her go.
A tapping at the window drew Cole’s attention the next morning. Shifting his hold on Lexi, he slipped out of bed and walked over to the crow perched on the other side of the glass. The crow’s black eyes watched him as he opened the window, and then it set a note in front of him.
Cole ran his fingers over the bird’s soft feathers before it flew away. He closed the window against the stench of the fire and lifted the note. He opened it to read his father’s words.
If Brokk is capable of the journey, it is time to come home.
Cole crumpled the note and tossed it in the trash before lifting his gaze to the glass. A heavy fog had settled over the land; its silvery tendrils hugged the window and obscured the destruction of the marketplace.
“What did it say?” Lexi asked.
He turned to find her sitting up on the bed; her auburn hair tumbled around her shoulders in tousled waves. Her green eyes were troubled, but she looked achingly lovely as she gazed at him.
“My father wants us to return,” he said.
The slight clench of her jaw was the only indication she didn’t like this news before she gave a small nod.
“Come with me,” he said.
Her eyebrows rose as her mouth parted. “I can’t.”
“It will only be for a couple of days.”
“I can’t leave Sahira here to deal with everything on her own. She hates the stables; she claims they smell. And now that the market is gone, it will be harder to find food, and our gardens aren’t ready to be harvested yet. I have too many responsibilities here to go, even if it’s only for a couple of days.”
And no matter how much he didn’t want to leave her, especially after yesterday's events, he had too many responsibilities to stay. There were far too many lives depending on him to return.
But staring at her, he didn’t care about those lives, the war, or how insane the Lord was; he preferred to stay with his mate. But he did care about his brothers and father, and if they didn’t stop the Lord, her life was in jeopardy too.
Nowhere was safe from the Lord and his horde of dragons.
Cole stepped away from the window and crossed the room to her. She’d fallen asleep in a baggy T-shirt that somehow managed to hide her lush curves but still made her look sexy as hell.
He could drag her into the Gloaming; she’d fight him every step of the way and probably end up hating him, but it was better than leaving her here where he couldn’t protect her.
“What about Malakai?” he asked.
“What about him?”
“What if he comes back while I’m gone.”
She gave him a sad smile as he stopped beside the bed. “It won’t be the first time I’ve had to deal with him, and it won’t be the last.”
That may be true, but he hated the idea of leaving her here. “Come with me.”
“I can’t.”
Cole wasn’t used to anyone telling him no, but he especially wasn’t used to the women he was sleeping with saying it. She had no reason to fear becoming shadow kissed.
“What if I insist that you come with me?” he asked.
“Don’t,” she said simply.
“Don’t?”
“Yes, don’t. Because I won’t go, and you won’t become a tyrant like the Lord or Malakai.”
He almost recoiled at her words but managed to stop himself. No, he wouldn’t be like either of them, but the idea of leaving her here….
He looked to the trash can and the note again. He couldn’t stay, and she wouldn’t leave. He could make her go, but that would destroy the trust between them. A large part of him did not care, but the smaller part wanted to keep his mate happy.
And if he forced her into the Gloaming, she would not be happy. But what does her happiness matter if she isn’t safe?
Cole rubbed at his temple. He hadn’t expected to find his mate, but once he did, he’d assumed it would be easy. He hadn’t expected her to be stubborn and set in her ways.
But he wouldn’t have Lexi any other way. Lowering his hands, he met her quizzical look. “I’ll return as soon as I can,” he said.
He could return to the Gloaming and be back in a day. She would be okay for a day, and after what happened last time, he doubted Malakai would return any time soon.
Bending, he rested his hands on her hips and plucked her from the bed. She gasped but didn’t protest when he slid onto the bed beneath her and settled her so she straddled his lap. She draped her arms over his shoulders.
Lexi didn’t know how to respond to the fact he was leaving or that he wanted her to go with him.
She’d known this day would come, but she still wasn’t ready for it. And as much as she yearned to, she couldn’t go with him. She had far too many responsibilities here and a certain dark fae to remove from beneath her manor.
Maybe if Orin wasn’t lounging in her tunnels, she would have asked the handyman to help in the stables like he did when they traveled to the Gloaming. But she couldn’t do that now.
But he was asking her to go with him! What did that mean? Why would he want such a thing? Didn’t dark fae usually forget all about their past partners when someone new popped up?
That’s what she’d always heard, and while there was no one new yet, there would be once he left the manor. There would be countless new then.
If she was with him, would he stay away from those women?
She shut the possibility down. It didn’t matter; she couldn’t go, so traversing down that path wouldn’t do her any good. Pondering it for too long would only make her crazy, and she planned to enjoy what little time they had left together.
If he returned, great. If he didn’t, well then, she would move on. It would hurt, but she would get over it.
When he lifted her and slid naked into bed, the image of the flames from yesterday tried to push their way back into her mind, but she shoved them aside. He was leaving, and no matter what he said, she might never see him again.
Gripping her hips, he guided her along his erection. She shuddered at the sensation of him slipping between her legs. The head of his shaft teased her clit as the brilliant blue of his eyes shifted to silver.
His hungry gaze excited her almost as much as the hands pushing her shirt up. He lifted it and pulled it off before tossing it aside. His eyes latched ravenously on her breasts as a small smile curved his lips.
“You’re gorgeous,” he murmured as he gazed at her.
He stroked her breast before teasing her nipple with his thumb. Then he lifted his hand to cup her cheek. He ran his thumb across her bottom lip before slipping it into her mouth to prod at one of her canines. Her fangs lengthened in response, and he smiled.
“You haven’t fed from me,” he said.
“I’ve never fed from anyone,” she said.
A spark of something lit his eyes. “We are going to have to remedy that.”
Her gaze fell to his neck as excitement twisted in her belly. Lexi wasn’t sure if she could do it without hurting him, but she was impatient to find out as she watched his blood pulse through the vein in his neck.
“Have you fed from me?” she asked as she played with the hair at his nape.
“No, but I’m going to,” he murmured as he ran his thumb across her lip again before pulling it down a little.
“Will I know when you do?”
“Yes.”
“Will it hurt?”
“No. Many say it enhances the pleasure.”
“Impossible.”
He chuckled as he cupped her nape and pulled her close for a kiss.
“Will I hurt you if I feed on you?” she asked when the kiss ended.
“No. And even if you did, I want it too much to care.”
Releasing her, he planted his hands behind him and leaned back on the bed. She frowned as he smiled at her.
“This is all you, beautiful,” he said.
“I… I don’t understand.”
“Explore, learn, discover what pleases you. I’m merely here to make sure you come.”
She wasn’t entirely sure what he meant by that, but his words made her wetter as she slid along the length of him before shifting so the head of his shaft teased her entrance.
However, no matter how much she wanted him inside her, she enjoyed this far too much to end it now. She moved, shifted, teased, and played with him as she ran her hands over his chest and down his stomach.
She traced the dips and hollows of his chiseled abdomen before shifting to explore his cock. His breath quickened when she ran her fingers over it before stroking it.
She thrilled at her power over him as his breathing changed, his erection pulsed in her grip, and his body tensed. He didn’t move as he continued to let her learn more about him, herself, and what they both liked.
When she finally took him inside her, Lexi was so aroused, she came almost instantly, but as she floated down from her high, he still didn’t touch her.
“Keep going,” he grated.
He said the words, but she saw the strain on his face as sweat beaded his forehead. Lexi leaned forward until her breasts rubbed against his chest.
She lifted her hips until he was nearly out of her again before sliding slowly back down. His head fell back as she ran her tongue across his chest.
She tasted sweat and man as his fingers entangled in her sheets and the corded muscles of his arms stood starkly out, but he still didn’t touch her. She ran her tongue back up his chest, across his collarbone, and up to his neck before nipping at it.
“You better feed soon, love,” he said. “I don’t know how much longer I can take this.”
He didn’t need to encourage her anymore. With a hammering heart, she kissed his neck again before resting her mouth over the solid thump of his pulse. Her concern over harming him caused her to hesitate.
“Do it,” he commanded.
And she found herself helpless to do anything but obey. Her lips skimmed back, and she sank her fangs into his throat. She cried out against his flesh as the hot wave of his blood pulsed into her mouth.
She’d never tasted anything so delicious as it slid down her throat and the power of it seeped into her veins. Out of her mind with desire, she tried to draw him closer. Sensing her frustration, his arms locked around her, and he pulled her flush against his chest.
Lexi wasn’t convinced she would feel it when he fed, but then his power seeped out until it crackled the air around them. Beneath her hands, his muscles swelled and vibrated.
At first, she didn’t understand what was happening, and then she realized he was growing stronger as he fed on the energy their joining emitted. The crackling in the air increased until it vibrated against her skin.
Oh yes, she could see why some believed it enhanced the pleasure as her skin came alive, the hair on her arms rose, and she craved more.
Cole drank in the power she emanated. In all of his many years, he’d never experienced a rush like the one she gave him, but he’d also never fed on his mate before—his mate.
He’d yet to claim her as a lycan would, but he was leaving his mark as only a dark fae could. She would remember him while he was gone, and she would be eagerly awaiting his return.
The dark fae didn’t have fated lovers like the lycan, but the fact she was his mate caused her to satisfy him in a way no other had before. As her sexual pleasure heightened, he drank in more and more of it until the air swirled and pulsed around them.
When her back bowed beneath his hands, her fangs retracted, and her head fell back as she cried out. The tightness of her sheath clenching around his dick tore his release from him.
Even as he was coming, he almost sank his fangs into her shoulder, pushed her back on the bed, and fucked her until she begged him to stop. He almost staked his lycan claim on her, but to do so would be to use her in a way no woman who lost her virginity only two nights ago should be used.
He would scare her, and he would claim her before he ever got the chance to tell her what she was to him.
Trembling, clinging to her, and trying to control the rampaging lycan demanding to be satisfied as much as the dark fae, he buried his face in her breasts and shuddered as his softening erection hardened again.
He could often go for hours and days at a time when the dark fae part of him was in one of its more demanding feeding periods, but no one had so easily aroused him as this woman.
Despite that, he reluctantly withdrew from her. She was immortal, she healed fast, her body adapted and changed swiftly to new situations, but she was still so new to this, and if he didn’t stop, he would claim her.
And since he wasn’t about to tell her that she was his mate before returning to the Gloaming, he had to stop. He wasn’t about to drop that news on her. It meant he’d have to claim her or deal with her rejection before leaving.
She collapsed against him and shivered as he ran his hands over her silken skin. He didn’t want to part from her, but if he stayed much longer, he would start all over again, and he would never leave today.
Unfortunately, that couldn’t happen.
He kissed her collarbone before tilting his head back to look up at her as she remained straddling his lap. “I’m coming back for you,” he vowed.
Surprise flickered through her eyes before she smiled at him. “I’ll understand if you don’t. I know what the dark fae are.”
“I’ve already told you that you don’t know what I am,” he growled. “I am coming back to you. I won’t be gone more than a day or two.”
She nodded, but he saw the doubt in her eyes. He hated that doubt, but his return would put an end to it. She would learn he had no intention of ever leaving her life.
“I’m going to leave a crow here; if anything happens, send a message to me. I’ll return immediately,” he said. “Let me know if Malakai returns.”
He would prefer to send a dark fae to watch over her while he was in the Gloaming, but he couldn’t have anyone else knowing about her yet. Eventually, word would get out that he’d mated—if she allowed him to do it—but until then, the best thing he could do to protect her was to keep her off the radar of his enemies.
Sending a guard to watch over would put an end to that. Word would rapidly spread amongst the immortals that he’d taken a special interest in someone.
“I mean it, Lexi,” he said as he squeezed her ass. “If you need me for anything, or if Malakai steps foot on this property again, then send that crow.”
“I will,” she promised.
He wanted to do so much more for her, but it was the best he could do for now.
Lexi blinked back the tears burning her eyes as she watched Cole and Brokk leave later that morning. In the tree above her head, the crow Cole left behind cawed loudly and ruffled its feathers but didn’t take flight.
Cole assured her that even if this crow became surrounded by a murder of others, it would return to her the second she raised her arm. She was tempted to test this but decided against commanding the beautiful creature when it wasn’t necessary.
When the brothers vanished from view, she turned away and trudged back to the manor. As she walked, she felt like the weight of the world was bearing down on her shoulders.
He’d said he would return, and she wanted to believe him, but as she walked, she prepared herself never to see him again.
He’s a dark fae; she reminded herself for the umpteenth time.
But she had to keep doing it because she needed it to sink in, or she might end up with a shattered heart.
If he never returned, it might take her years to recover from the blow, but she would recover if she were expecting it. But if she had her hopes up and he never returned, it would make things so much worse.
He’s also lycan. That niggling thought refused to die no matter how many times she tried to kill it. Such an idea was dangerous as it would only lead to her getting her hopes up.
The lycan could be the most loyal immortals when it came to their family and their mates, but she wasn’t family, and he’d never mentioned mates to her.
Dark fae or not, his father loved his mother deeply.
But there was no mention of love between us!
She realized she was spiraling into a dark well of despair and hope that needed to end. She didn’t know why he was so adamant about returning to her, but she wouldn’t allow herself to believe it was for anything more than what they’d shared these past few days.
He liked her; she didn’t doubt that. And she liked him, probably too much, but that didn’t mean it was anything more.
He could quite possibly become completely distracted in the Gloaming and forget she existed.
She refused to get her hopes up too much about his return, but she wasn’t going to turn into a moping, melancholy mess because he’d returned home… as she’d always known he would.
Even if he never returned, she had a life to live and things to do. One of those things might still be in her tunnels and most likely seething because she hadn’t returned in days.
Lexi slipped back into the manor and headed for the kitchen. She’d fed well on Cole this morning, but she hadn’t satisfied her human appetite yet.
Sahira was standing at the stove, stirring a pot as she worked to replenish the rest of her healing salves now that Brokk was gone. Sitting beside her, Shade was working to clean his paw, which he lowered to study Lexi when she entered the room.
“Have they left?” Sahira asked.
Lexi opened and closed a couple of cabinets, but most were empty. Thankfully, their garden would start yielding some produce soon, and the goats would provide milk and cheese while the chickens produced eggs.
They wouldn’t have as much now that the market was gone, but they were better off than most, and they would get through this. If push came to shove, they could travel to another marketplace, but the closest one was now an hour away.
She didn’t want to think about making that journey as she closed the cabinets and went to the fridge. She opened the refrigerator and removed a piece of cheese.
“Yes,” she said as she took a knife from the drawer and sliced off a couple of pieces from the block.
“What happened to your neck?”
Lexi sighed. She’d dreaded this conversation and had hoped that Sahira wouldn’t notice or question her on it, but now that she had…
“Cole,” Lexi admitted, and Sahira’s eyes darkened as her hand tightened on the knife. “It wasn’t on purpose!”
Lexi told her what happened, and though she didn’t think Cole would like her revealing his nightmares to her aunt, she couldn’t hide them from Sahira. If her aunt didn’t know the whole truth, she would hate Cole, and Lexi couldn’t have that.
When she finished, Sahira’s hand relaxed a little on the blade, but she still looked murderous.
“He’s dangerous,” Sahira said.
“Not to me.”
“Your neck says differently.”
“He’s not dangerous to me. This was an accident. It won’t happen again.”
“If it does, I’ll castrate him.”
Lexi gulped. “He doesn’t sleep when I’m there. He stays up the entire time instead because he wants me to stay with him.”
Sahira’s brow furrowed, and her mouth pursed. “That’s… odd.”
Lexi didn’t respond.
“I still don’t like it,” Sahira said.
“I know.”
Her aunt sighed and set down her knife. “Here.” Sahira reached into her apron pocket and set a bottle of blue liquid on the counter near her.
“What’s that?” Lexi asked around a mouthful of cheese.
“Birth control. Use it.”
Lexi almost choked on her cheese but managed to swallow it. “Sahira—”
“Take a sip every night, and it will keep you from getting pregnant now and in the future.”
Lexi cursed the blush creeping up her cheeks as she studied the liquid and her hand fell involuntarily to her belly. She knew it wasn’t possible, but the idea of Cole’s baby caused a small thrill of excitement to course through her.
“Cole is on birth control,” she said.
“Hmm,” Sahira grunted. “It won’t hurt to have you both on it. Besides, he might have used it wrong or messed something up or forgotten to take it, so there is always that possibility. And….”
“And what?” Lexi prodded when Sahira’s voice trailed off.
Sahira lifted her head, and their eyes met. Then she tossed some herbs into the pot. “And you’ll be prepared for the next man.”
Lexi felt like Sahira had slapped her, but she managed to keep herself from recoiling. She kept telling herself she was prepared for Cole not to return, but hearing Sahira say it slammed the reality of it home.
Her aunt didn’t expect him to return, and she expected Lexi to prepare for the next man who entered her life. The idea of another man touching her the way Cole did made her stomach clench; she couldn’t even consider that possibility right now.
“He said he would come back, but I’m not so sure,” she admitted.
“Hmm,” Sahira muttered.
When Lexi grasped the bottle, she didn’t realize how close it was to the flames beneath Sahira’s pot. She yelped and pulled her hand away when the fire burnt her finger.
“Are you okay?” Sahira asked.
Lexi sucked on her burnt finger as she slid the potion into her pocket. “I’m fine.”
If Cole returned, she would use it when she was certain she wasn’t pregnant, but not now. She couldn’t bring herself to use it if there was a small chance she carried his child. It would be difficult to raise a human, vampire, lycan, dark fae baby on her own, but she would do it.
“Thank you,” she said.
Sahira grunted again.
“I know he’s a dark fae, but….” Lexi’s gaze shifted to the window and the crow sitting in a tree across the way.
“But?” Sahira prompted.
“But I think he’s a good man.”
Sahira grunted again. Lexi kissed her cheek.
“I love you too, auntie,” she teased.
Sahira rolled her eyes. “Ass kisser.”
Lexi chuckled and folded the rest of the cheese into a napkin. “I’ll be in the stables.”
Sahira didn’t reply as Lexi made her way out the door and toward the stables. She slipped inside and closed the door behind her. Taking a deep breath, she steadied herself before entering the feed room.
She lifted a couple of bags of feed and tossed them aside to expose the trapdoor beneath. The door blended so seamlessly into the floor that anyone who didn’t know it was there would never see it even without the bags on top.
Removing the bottle from her pocket, Lexi hid it in one of the horse’s feed tubs, so she didn’t accidentally break it. Then she lifted the door and slipped into the shadows below.
She closed the door behind her. From experience, she knew the open space the moved bags created wouldn’t attract any attention as there were other spaces like it within the feed room.
Lexi lifted the flashlight from the hook below the door and clicked it on before descending the steps. The beam played across the walls as she sped through the tunnels and in the direction of where she last saw Orin.
She didn’t know if she expected him to be there or not; if he was, she imagined he was pretty pissed over her absence. Despite knowing that, she didn’t feel any apprehension over encountering an irate dark fae down here. She’d had enough of bossy, overbearing men, and she wasn’t about to let this one run all over her again.
She was almost to the place where she last saw Orin when low, gravelly words issued from the shadows. “Where the fuck have you been?”
Lexi sighed and turned to face Orin. The beam found him standing in the corner of two adjoining tunnels. His black eyes glimmered with malice as he studied her with a look that made the hair on her nape rise, but she didn’t back away from him.
“I was helping to save one of your brothers,” she retorted.
Those words knocked some of the ire out of him, and he gaped at her before covering it up. Confronted with him again, that niggling guilt tugged at her again.
She’d kept his presence here a secret from Cole. But she was sure Cole had plenty of secrets of his own, and it wasn’t like they were in a relationship and he’d told her everything.
She tried to reassure herself with this reasoning, but the guilt wouldn’t let go.
“You could have left,” she said. “Believe me, I would have preferred it if you did.”
“I can’t just pop out of here,” he retorted. “I have no idea where any of these tunnels go or what I’d emerge into. Plus, you shut some of the gates, so I don’t have many places to roam.”
Lexi shrugged, but as much as she wanted him gone, she was glad he hadn’t decided to find his way out. It could have been disastrous, especially if one of those ways entered into the manor.
“What do you mean you helped save one of my brothers?” he asked.
She filled him in on what happened with Brokk but emitted all details about Cole and herself. She must have given something away though as his calculating eyes ran inquisitively over her.
“And you didn’t tell them I was here?” he asked.
“You’re still here, aren’t you?”
Instead of answering her question, he asked another. “And how is Cole?”
She somehow, miraculously, managed not to blush as she responded. “Fine. They both returned to the Gloaming today, which means I can take you out of here.”
She pulled the cheese from her pocket and tossed it to him. He caught it with ease.
“If you’ll follow me,” she said.
“And what if I decide not to go back out there?”
“Then that’s your choice, but I’m not coming back here. You can let me lead you out somewhere safe, or you can wander around here until you’re half-starved and desperate. Once that happens, you’ll have to take the risk of leaving here and someone seeing you.”
“And then they’ll catch you too.”
“I. Don’t. Care,” she enunciated.
It was a bald-faced lie; of course, she cared. They both knew that, but she was not going to be at his mercy anymore. She’d rather be crisp fried by a dragon than continue to live like this.
“I’m not going to keep putting myself at risk by continuing to come down here. Either leave now, or you’re on your own.”
He bit into the cheese and chewed before swallowing. “Lead the way, little human.”
She glowered at him but refused to give him the satisfaction of telling him off. Turning on her heel, she didn’t look back at him as she led the way to a door that opened into a shed on the edge of her property.
The shed housed all sorts of garden tools, fertilizer, and some seeds, but few knew its location as it was tucked within a copse of trees. She had no doubt it would be safe to emerge there.
Climbing the stairs to the door, she slid the bolts locking it free, grasped the handle, and pushed it up. The scent of dirt and earth enveloped her.
Though she was sure it was safe, she still poked her head cautiously out to look around before climbing into the shadowy interior of the shed. She stepped out of Orin’s way before hurrying over to one of the three windows.
Even if someone had their face against the glass, they couldn’t see into the shed. Her father had made sure of that with tinted windows.
Still, she approached the glass slowly before peaking outside. Nothing moved through the trees, so she went to one of the other windows.
She checked that one before going to the last window. The last window held her attention longer than the others. Through the trees encircling the shed, she could see smoke coiling insidiously into the air from the remains of the marketplace.
The smoke made her recall the thunderous booms that shook the earth and the way the dragon destroyed without remorse. Screams echoed in her head as that helpless feeling descended over her again.
She despised feeling so powerless in this new, uncertain world. There had to be something she could do to put an end to all the death and senseless violence, but she had no idea what.
Orin’s reflection appeared in the glass as he came to stand behind her. “What happened there?” he inquired.
“The Lord decided there was a traitor in the marketplace.”
“Was there?”
“I don’t think so.”
“That makes sense.”
She turned to face him. “How does that make sense?”
He shrugged as he rubbed at the thick layer of stubble lining his chin. “Because the only thing the Lord does consistently is killing and destroying indiscriminately. Now that the war is over, he has to focus his bloodlust somewhere, and it doesn’t matter to him if that focus deserves it or not. He enjoys killing too much to stop now.”
Her blood ran cold; the beings in the marketplace were most likely innocent, but she wasn’t. Harboring him made her a traitor, but that might not matter. The Lord could get bored and send his dragons here anyway.
She preferred to lessen her chances of that happening. Terror spurred her into action, and she pushed against Orin’s solid chest as she nudged him toward the door. “You have to go.”
She expected him to resist her or offer up some wiseass response, but he relented to her desperate hands. When he arrived at the door, he rested his hand on the knob and faced her.
“Don’t ever tell anyone I was here,” he said.
“Do I look like an idiot?” she retorted. “Don’t ever come back. You’ll find the shed locked as well as the entrance to the tunnel. I also plan on shutting some gates and blocking off this section of the tunnel.”
His black eyes were as emotionless as a shark’s as they roamed over her. She didn’t shrink beneath his scrutiny. Instead, she scowled at him as a smile curved the edges of his mouth.
“Farewell then,” he said.
He opened the door and stepped outside. She started to close the door behind him, but he held out his palm to stop her and nudged it back open.
“If I were you, I’d stay away from my brother. Cole’s even more ruthless than me.”
With those final words, he released the door and sauntered away like he didn’t have a care in the world. The bastard shoved his hands in his pockets and whistled while he walked.
It took everything Lexi had not to slam the door behind him. Instead, she quietly closed it and turned the locks. She would have to remember to bring the keys with her the next time she came to the shed; there was no way she was leaving this door unlocked again.
She refused to consider his words as she slipped into the tunnel and slid the bolts back into place before retreating into the tunnels. She closed a few gates behind her to ensure the tunnel was blocked off further.
When she finished, the only thing she had to do was think on Orin’s parting words as she walked back toward the stables.
“You’re home,” his father said as he glided across the floor toward them.
He embraced Brokk first, and they hugged each other before breaking apart. His father grasped Brokk’s shoulders and leaned back to study him. “How are you?”
“Much better now,” Brokk replied. “Though I could use a shower and my clothes.”
“Go do what you must and then meet me in my solar.”
Brokk nodded before leaving.
“And how are you doing?” his father inquired as they embraced.
“I’ve been worse,” Cole said. “But I have to agree about my clothes.”
His father laughed and squeezed his shoulders. “Go on then; meet me in my solar as soon as you’re finished.”
Cole slipped away. He retreated to his room, where he showered and dressed in clothes that fit him. His clothes were far more comfortable, but he missed the ones he’d worn as they still smelled of Lexi.
The soap and water had washed her scent from him. However, the memory of it teased his nostrils as he recalled the feel of her in his arms. And the sooner he returned to his father, the sooner he could see her again.
He left the room and practically jogged across the palace to his father’s private solar. The candles floating in the air cast shadows across the dark floors and walls.
His steps reverberated off the stones as he passed countless closed doors to rooms he’d never entered. He had no idea what lay beyond most of them.
When he arrived at the solar, he knocked and waited for his father to bid him enter before stepping into the room. His father sat in his favorite chair with a glass of whiskey by his hand. The fire crackling in the hearth filled the room with the sweet aroma of fae wood.
Cole helped himself to a glass of the amber liquid and settled into the chair across from his dad. The warmth of the fire helped soothe some of his lingering anxiety, but he was impatient to get back to Lexi.
“What happened out there?” his father inquired.
Cole had only given him scant details in his letters, and now he filled him in on the rest of it.
“You were lucky to find the witch,” his father said.
“Luck had nothing to do with it. I knew she was there.”
“And how is that?”
“It was Del’s mansion; his sister was the witch.”
“I see. I recall her from the party. I also recall that his daughter is a beautiful woman.”
“Yes, she is.”
“You sound intrigued by the girl.”
“It’s more than that; she’s my mate.”
“Your lycan mate?”
“Yes.”
Cole sipped his whiskey as he gazed over his father’s shoulder. One of the moons, Carpton, hung outside the window. The sight of it caused the lycan part of him to stir in a way it never had before.
He’d never transformed because of the moon’s pull, but now that Lexi had awakened his more primitive urges, they were making themselves known more often than they had before. Lycans didn’t transform with every full moon, but they felt connected to the moon’s cycles that often drew the beast out of them as the moon became fuller.
His need to shift grew as he imagined feeling the earth beneath him and the wind in his hair while he raced back to her. The impulse was so strong his fangs lengthened, and the scent of the night air intensified as it filled his nose.
His fingers clenched on his glass. It would have shattered in his grasp if his father didn’t lean across the distance separating them to remove it from his hand.
“Easy, son,” he murmured as he set the glass on the table.
Cole took a steadying breath as he leashed the lycan part of him once more.
“Have you claimed her?” his father asked.
“No. I didn’t have the chance to discuss it with her before your last letter asking us to return.”
“It will be easier for you once you do. It was for your mother.”
He fucking hoped so. He’d never liked feeling out of control; it was why he’d always identified more with his dark fae side, but the lycan was nowhere near as detached and calculating. It was making that clearly known.
“Do you care for her?” his father inquired.
“More than I ever believed possible.”
Until he said the words, he hadn’t realized how much he cared for Lexi. Not only was she his mate, but he liked her and admired her determination to keep her manor going and the ones she loved safe.
His father’s grin lit his eyes. “I’m so happy for you!”
Cole didn’t know how to reply, and before he could respond, the smile slid from his father’s face.
“Protect her, Colburn,” he said. “Don’t lose her like I lost your mother. It’s not something… it’s not something you ever fully recover from.”
His father’s eyes flickered away as anguish briefly replaced his joy. When he looked at Cole again, his smile was back in place, but it no longer lit his eyes.
“I will keep her safe,” Cole vowed.
“Good. Why didn’t you bring her back with you?”
“She refused to come. She has responsibilities in the human realm, and she couldn’t leave them. I plan to return to her as soon as I can.”
“Ah, so she is stubborn.”
“Very.”
His father laughed as he sipped his whiskey. “I was with a stubborn woman once. She drove me crazy, but I wouldn’t have had it any other way. I was fortunate I got the time I did with her and my firstborn son, but I’ve missed her every day since I lost her.”
“So have I,” Cole admitted.
It was these times, when it was just them, or them and his brothers, that Cole enjoyed the most. No one else would ever see this side of his father. It was reserved solely for his family.
His father was a ruthless ruler who didn’t tolerate disobedience from his followers. He handed out punishments with no remorse and rarely smiled. But when he was alone with those he loved, he was an entirely different entity.
“I never thought I’d see the day when you would find a woman,” his father murmured.
“Neither did I.”
His father finished off his drink before pouring himself another. Then he dipped a hand into his shirt, pulled out the chain he wore around his neck, and unclasped it. Cole had seen the chain countless times over the years, but he’d never seen his father remove it.
His dad slipped the two rings from the chain and hefted them in his hands. Sorrow radiated from him as he inspected them before rising and walking over to Cole. He tipped his head back as his dad stopped in front of him.
“Hold out your hand,” his dad commanded.
Cole did as he said, and his father placed the rings on his palm.
“These were mine and your mother’s,” he said.
“I know,” Cole murmured as he inspected the delicate bands.
The light reflecting off the silver bands emphasized the markings etched onto them. His mother’s ring was so delicate he was afraid he’d crush it in his fingers, but made of fae metal, it was far stronger than it looked.
He held them back out to his father, but his dad clasped his hand and closed his fingers over them. “Keep them. Give your mate your mother’s ring.”
“I can’t do that.”
“Yes, you can.”
“They’re yours. It’s… it’s Mom’s.”
“And now they’re yours.”
“You’ve worn them—”
“For six hundred and sixty-five years.”
Had it been that long? He bowed his head as he stared at the rings and remembered the woman whose love he still felt after all these centuries.
As he gazed at her band, he recalled seeing it on her hand as she ran her fingers through his hair or worked in one of her many gardens.
“I don’t need them to remember her,” his father said as he rested his hand on Cole’s shoulder. “She’ll always be in my heart, and I have only to look at you to remember her.”
Cole’s head fell back, and he gazed up at his father. He hadn’t expected the sheen of tears in his dad’s eyes, but then his father blinked them away.
“Give your girl your mother’s ring. It’s what she would have wanted, and it would have made her so happy,” his dad said.
“We’re not anywhere near that stage.”
“When you are, give it to her.” His dad squeezed his shoulder before releasing him and returning to his chair. “If you’re a fraction as happy with her as I was with your mother, you’ll have a wonderful life together, and that is all I ever wanted for you and your brothers.”
Before Cole could respond, Brokk breezed into the room with his wet hair hanging into his eyes and a smile on his face. “What did I miss?”
“Nothing,” their father replied as he lifted his drink.
Cole slid the rings into his pocket. When he met his father’s eyes again, they smiled at each other before his dad’s face became more serious.
“We have a meeting with the others tomorrow,” his father said. “They’re arriving here at lunch.”
Cole knew the others meant the coalition.
“What the Lord did to that marketplace never should have happened,” Brokk said. “He’s becoming more unstable and crueler.”
“I know,” their father murmured as he twisted his glass in his hands. “What we don’t know is how to get at him and kill him.”
And a solution to that would solve so many of their problems.
They spent the next few hours catching up and plotting, but none of them had any new ideas. In the end, they were no closer to a solution for the Lord, and if they didn’t find one soon, he would destroy them all.
Every passing day was one more that the power of the throne ate into the increasingly rancid brain of the man sitting on it. But they still had no idea how to stop him.
This fact was becoming increasingly annoying. Cole felt as if they’d done nothing but talk about it for years, and, in truth, they had.
There had to be some weakness they were missing, but this Lord had learned from the mistakes of the other mad rulers who came before him. He wouldn’t repeat the same mistakes that allowed others to be destroyed.
Cole was preparing to rise and send a crow to Lexi when a knock sounded on the door. They exchanged a look before his father set down his whiskey and rose. It was a clear rule that they were to be left alone when they were in the solar.
His father strode with elegant, fluid grace to the door and opened it to reveal Sindri on the other side. The helot’s black eyes glittered in the dim light.
A couple of hundred years ago, Sindri made the mistake of gathering an army to try to dethrone Tove. That army was ruthlessly slaughtered, but Tove kept Sindri alive. He had the dark fae’s powers bound by a coven of witches and forced Sindri into servitude.
The coven was depleted for weeks afterward, but Tove gave them enough carisle to make it worth their while. He also allowed them to stay in the palace until they were strong enough to travel again.
No one in the palace trusted Sindri, but he was a neutered dog, and this punishment was far worse than death. Every day, Sindri repeatedly endured the humiliation of his defeat as he waited on the man he’d sought to depose.
“What is it, Sindri?” Tove demanded.
“There is a messenger here from the Lord, milord,” Sindri murmured as he bowed his head.
The irritation vanished from Tove’s face. “Then send him in.”
“As you wish, mi—”
Sindri didn’t get a chance to finish speaking before a warlock pushed past him and barged into the solar. The abrupt action and the audacity of the warlock caused Cole to set his glass down.
Rising, he braced his legs apart as he surveyed the haughty-looking warlock who practically sneered at his father.
This fucker deserves a beating.
Cole flexed his hands. No one entered his father’s private room in such a way.
Beside him, Brokk also rose. The warlock seemed not to notice the increased hostility in the room as Tove kept his face expressionless, but Cole didn’t miss the fury in his father’s eyes.
“The Lord will speak with you,” the messenger stated.
“Of course,” Tove said. “Tell him that I will join him in the morning.”
“He will see you now. You”—the warlock’s eyes flicked to Cole— “and your eldest son.”
Cole shoved aside the uneasy feeling the words created in his stomach. They’d never been summoned to the Lord in such a way, and Cole was never ordered to attend with his father.
He’d traveled to the Dragonian realm with his dad before, but he’d never been commanded there. After the events at the marketplace, this could not be good.
It took a few seconds for Tove to respond, and Cole heard the crackle of ire in his voice when he spoke. “Of course.”
Beside Tove, Sindri smiled smugly, and his shoulders went back a little. Cole contemplated punching that smile off his face, but he couldn’t reveal his anger to this warlock.
Once this was over, he would discuss destroying Sindri with his father. The man had served his punishment, and they were all better off without him in the palace.
His dad turned toward him and plastered on a smile that many wouldn’t recognize as fake, but Cole saw through it. “Let us go, Colburn. Brokk, stay here and see over the realm.”
“Of course, Father,” Brokk murmured.
Cole glanced at the crow sitting on the windowsill. If he sent a message to Lexi now, the Lord’s minion would report the crow's departure, and they might try to discover where the bird went.
The Lord could not know Lexi existed. He glanced at his brother, but he couldn’t ask Brokk to look after her without the others overhearing him. And not in the mood to deal with Brokk’s questions and teasing, he hadn’t discussed what Lexi was to him with Brokk, so his brother wouldn’t think to check on her.
She had to know he might be gone longer than he planned, but he didn’t know how to tell her without revealing too much, and in the end, her safety was the most important thing to him. As he followed his father out the door, he could only hope they would return soon.
However, he had a bad feeling they wouldn’t be returning soon… if they returned at all.
When the third day passed without any word from Cole, Lexi’s shoulders slumped a little and she felt like a weight was bearing down on them. By the time the fifth day passed, she was kicking herself for believing he would return.
She’d known better than to trust a dark fae; she’d repeatedly told herself not to trust him, but somehow, he slipped inside her defenses. And he’d forgotten her already.
Lexi had believed she’d prepared for him to forget her, but she hadn’t. With every passing day, her sadness grew.
However, no matter how much it felt like someone was squeezing her heart in her chest, she didn’t cry.
She refused to shed a tear over him even though some days she yearned to sit down and sob out her disappointment. But once she started, she wouldn’t stop, and he wasn’t worth her tears.
That fifth night, as she lay alone in bed, it took all she had not to roll over and cry into the pillows still smelling of him, but she didn’t.
Instead, when the sun rose, she ripped her sheets, pillows, and comforter off the bed, carried them downstairs, and stuffed them in the washer. Thankfully, the electricity was working well as she washed them three times to ensure no hint of him remained on them.
The urge to cry was not so bad the following night.
On the seventh day, she learned she wasn’t pregnant. Relief flowed through her, as did a little sadness. The last thing she needed was a baby in this crazy world, and one whose father would never know about its existence, but she couldn’t shake her lingering disappointment.
She tucked Sahira’s bottle of birth control into a cabinet where she wouldn’t see it and closed the door. She wouldn’t have any use for it again for a while. Asshole or not, it would be some time before she moved on from Cole.
Through it all, she realized that either Cole was not her consort, or she lacked another vampire trait. From what she’d heard, a vampire who lost their consort was inconsolable and often went to the grave soon after.
While she was grieving and lost, she didn’t plan to die any time soon, and she wasn’t inconsolable. Life went on, she would get over this, and one day, she would forget him just as he’d forgotten her.
Or at least she hoped she would.
At least she hadn’t been foolish enough to love him. But as she told herself this, she recognized it as another lie.
On the morning of the eighth day, she went out to dispense as much food as they could spare to the dejected people rambling past the manor. Most were looking for work or food, but some seemed so broken that she wasn’t sure they knew where they were anymore.
They couldn’t spare much food, but their crops would soon be ready to harvest, and they were already gathering peas and tomatoes from the garden.
On the tenth day, she fed the people before heading into the woods. She had to gather some supplies from the shed before heading for the garden.
She emerged from the shed with a shovel and gloves when something zipped through the tree’s shadows. It moved so fast she couldn’t tell what it was, but it was something more than human, and that meant it was a threat.
Lexi dropped her gloves and shifted her hold on the shovel as she prepared to bash in the brains of whatever was moving through those trees. She caught another blur of movement to her right and turned to face it.
Whatever was out there was screwing with the wrong immortal. She’d never sought a fight before, but she’d gladly take her anger at Cole out on this asshole.
And then the blur vanished. She stared at the pine tree it stopped behind as she willed it to emerge. Was it Malakai?
Her heart raced at the possibility. She hadn’t seen him since that day with Cole, but she didn’t kid herself into thinking he wasn’t coming back.
Lexi held her breath as she waited to see if Malakai had finally returned. After a few seconds, Orin stepped out.
At first, she was relieved to see him instead of Malakai, and then she recalled how much trouble he could cause her, and she scowled at him.
He grinned at her as he eyed the shovel and lifted his hands. “Easy there, killer.”
She shifted her hold on the shovel. She’d told him never to come back here, and she’d meant it.
“What are you doing here?” she snapped.
His eyebrows rose, and even she was surprised by the vehemence of her tone. But she’d had enough of him and all dark fae. As far as she was concerned, they could all return to the Gloaming and rot there.
“What has your panties in a bunch?” he asked with wry humor.
“You’re disgusting.”
He grinned as he leaned against a tree. He crossed his legs and folded his arms over his lean chest. The striking similarities between him and Cole only made her want to hit him more.
“So I’ve been told,” he murmured. “But I think I’m pretty amazing.”
“You’re the only one.” She bent and lifted her gloves from the ground, hefted the shovel over her shoulder, and started through the woods. She’d prefer to smack him with the shovel, but she didn’t want to be anywhere near him. “Get out of here.”
“Would you like all of us to leave?”
His words froze her, and for a minute, she stared straight ahead as she watched the sun’s rays playing through the trees and listened to the bird’s song. It was such a peaceful, beautiful morning, and she’d been looking forward to losing herself in the garden. She wanted her hands in the dirt and the rich aroma of the earth filling her nostrils as it eased her heartache.
Instead, she was dealing with asshole number two of the dark fae realm. His older brother had taken over the title of asshole number one.
With a sigh, she turned back to him. She opened her mouth to ask what he was talking about, but before she could, more shadows moved through the trees and drew closer.
The first one to emerge was a young woman holding a small boy in her arms. The woman was human, but the tiny fangs on the boy indicated he was part vampire. Soot streaked their noses, cheeks, and torn clothes as they stared at her from haunted eyes. No child should have eyes that wise and sad, but suffering etched his face.
From behind them, more people and immortals emerged from the woods. In the end, three men, two women, a little girl, and the boy stood before her.
She stared at their battered countenances before shifting her attention to Orin. She’d prefer never to speak to him again, but she couldn’t walk away from these people.
“What’s going on?” she asked.
He stepped away from the tree and approached her. “They’re being hunted.”
“Why? And by who?”
“Because they survived the marketplace and by the Lord’s followers. No one was supposed to survive the attack, but they did.”
“I….” Her gaze flicked to them as Orin stopped before her. “I don’t understand.”
He clasped her elbow and led her a few feet away. She glowered at him as they walked, but she followed him. There was no point fighting when she wanted answers.
“Yes, you do,” Orin said as he stopped and turned to face her. “They’re on the run.”
Lexi jerked her arm free of his grasp and gave him a seething look. “And you’re helping to keep them alive?”
“Yes.”
She studied him, but she didn’t see anything smug in his gaze this time. No, all she saw was an earnestness that tempted her to punch him. He was an asshole, and she much preferred him that way.
She was sick of being used and manipulated by the dark fae, and even if Orin meant well, she’d told him never to return. He was using these people to manipulate her into doing what he wanted her to do.
And she was scared she knew what it was.
“I suppose you’re helping them out of the kindness of your blackened heart?” she muttered sarcastically.
“You’re a lot more bitter than the last time I saw you.”
“I’m sick of your shit.”
“Just mine or someone else’s too?”
She swore the top of her head was going to blow off as her blood pressure skyrocketed. It took everything she had not to bash his brains in with the shovel. However, she was not in the mood to pick brains from her clothes.
“Leave, Orin, and don’t come back,” she said.
“They need a place to stay, or they’re going to die. I’m running out of places to hide them, and the humans are slowing us down. Plus, I can’t take the mortals into any of the Shadow Realms.”
“I can’t help you.”
“There were more of them yesterday. We lost two; one was a child.”
“Leave, Orin.”
She hissed the words, but her gaze returned to where the others huddled together while they warily eyed the trees. The boy was gazing at her with his big blue eyes. When his mother wrapped her hand around his head and pressed it to her chest, he stuck his thumb in his mouth.
They were so broken and so helpless. Getting involved with this was a very bad idea, but how could she say no to the children? How could she turn any of them away?
Because it could lead to your death, the destruction of the manor, and possibly get Sahira killed.
Still, her heart ached for them, and her conviction to get rid of Orin wavered.
“Why are you trying to help them?” she asked distrustfully. “I know it’s not from the goodness of your deadened heart.”
“Ouch,” Orin said and slapped his hands over his heart. “You wound me, milady.”
Lexi shot him a look; he returned it with a smug grin.
“Don’t screw with me,” she warned.
“Seriously, who got your panties in such a bunch? Was it my big brother, or did he get them off?”
A muscle twitched in her jaw, and red filled her vision. She adjusted her hold on the shovel as she prepared to bash him with it, but he threw up his hands and edged back.
“Easy, killer,” he murmured.
“I’m not in the mood, Orin.”
“Obviously, but I’m not here to fight. I’m here to find help for these innocent souls.”
“Why are you helping them?” she demanded.
“I’m not the hideous monster you think I am.”
“Oh, no?”
“No,” he said, and for the first time, there was no amusement in his gaze. “They need help, and I’m going to give it to them. Plus, the more fighters we have to stand against the Lord, the better chance we have of defeating him.”
“So, it’s not entirely from the goodness of your heart?” she asked sarcastically.
He didn’t respond.
“They’re not fighters,” she said.
She refrained from saying there was no way to beat the Lord as long as he had the dragons on his side, but she held her tongue. This day was depressing enough without adding more gloomy crap onto it.
“Not yet,” Orin said.
The little girl let out a small sniffle and whispered, “Mommy.”
The man holding her shushed her as he swayed her gently from side to side. At first, Lexi thought he was rocking to comfort her, but she realized he was doing it because he was about to fall over.
“We lost her mother yesterday,” Orin said.
Lexi winced and lowered her shovel.
“Are you going to turn them away?” Orin asked.
She scowled at him, but when she glanced back at the refugees, some of her anger deflated. Then she looked toward what remained of the marketplace.
Smoke no longer rose from the ashes, but the stench of fire lingered in the air. For over a week now, she’d felt utterly helpless as she brought food to the broken masses passing her property.
The Lord must be stopped; it wouldn’t be with this ragtag bunch of fugitives, but could she turn them away?
She glanced toward the manor, but she couldn’t see it through the trees. However, she knew her home was there. The manor and Sahira were all she had left in this world.
No, they weren’t all she had left. She also had herself, and how could she possibly live with herself if she turned these broken refugees away and the children died?
If she agreed to this, she was putting everyone and everything she loved at risk. What would her father think about her jeopardizing everything he worked to accomplish?
But she knew he wouldn’t have turned any of them away. Her father had presented a gruff, tough exterior to the world, but he’d been a big old softie at heart. He’d fought for the Lord, but he never would have approved of what that monster did to the human realm.
The war over the mortal realm had been waged, but it wasn’t over. Instead, a new war was beginning, and she had to choose a side.
But if she chose this side, it would pit her against Cole.
She immediately hated herself for thinking that. It didn’t matter if they ended up on opposite sides of this new war. He wasn’t coming back, and she had to accept that.
And even if he was coming back, this was her stance to take. No matter how much she cared for him, she wouldn’t let any man dictate where she stood in this world.
She had to get on with her life, and no matter what side Cole and her father chose, she had to do what she believed was best. And there was only one decision that would allow her to have any respect for herself for the rest of her life.
What about Sahira?
Guilt tugged at her. Her aunt couldn’t know about this; it would only put her in danger. If Lexi was caught, Sahira could truthfully plead that she hadn’t known anything about this. It might be enough to save her.
I’ll have to make sure I don’t get caught. She didn’t think it would be that simple, but she would do whatever it took to protect her aunt.
Knowing she was putting everything she loved at risk, she closed her eyes and took a deep breath before saying. “I don’t have much food to spare.”
She opened her eyes to find Orin grinning at her. Her teeth ground back and forth as she glowered at the arrogant prick.
“I’ll help with feeding them,” he said.
“I can’t have you coming and going from the tunnels.”
“I’ll be careful and conceal myself in the shadows.”
She swallowed the lump rising in her throat. If she made this choice, she couldn’t turn back. She’d be putting her neck on the line for a bunch of strangers and a douchey fae as trustworthy as a crocodile with a toothache.
“Why are you really doing this?” she asked.
“The war against the Lord is taking on many forms. Undermining him every chance we get is only one of those forms.”
She suspected it was more than that, but she couldn’t bring herself to believe he might actually have a heart, even if it was a minuscule one.
“How many others are fighting on your side?” she asked.
“I can’t reveal that.”
“Will you reveal my tunnels to them?”
He hesitated before replying, “No. Your secret is safe with me.”
She shifted her hold on the shovel and lowered her forehead to rub it with one hand. He was probably lying to her, but putting her decision off was pointless, and standing out here only put them at a greater risk of exposure.
They both knew she wasn’t going to turn these poor fugitives away.
“Elexiandra.” She lifted her head to look at him. “I won’t tell anyone about these tunnels.”
“You’ve already told these people.”
He slipped a vial from inside his shirt pocket and held it before her. “It’s a forgetting potion. Once they’re safely ensconced inside, I’ll give it to them.”
She wished she’d had that to use on him.
“They’ll never remember how to get here,” he continued. “I will keep your secret safe because it benefits me to do so.”
And that was a truth she could count on. While the tunnels remained a secret, he would have a place to hide. Lowering her hands, she looked up at him.
“Were you planning on entering the tunnel no matter what?” she asked.
“You told me you were going to shut it off.”
“Don’t play your games with me; yes or no? Were you going to try to get into the tunnel without me?”
“Of course, but I don’t have to do that now, do I?”
Her teeth were going to be nubs if she didn’t stop grinding them. No matter what happened, when this was over, she was going to find a way to get back at this asshole for all the shit he’d put her through.
“I’ll hide them,” she bit out.
“I knew I could count on you,” he said with a wink.
Without realizing she intended to do it, her hand fisted and she swung at him. Her punch was so hard and fast that he didn’t have time to dodge it before it slammed into his nose. His head shot back, and his hands flew to his face.
“Fuck you!” she spat.
The fugitives all gasped and took a couple of steps away from her. She glared at Orin as he covered his nose and stared at her over the top of his fingers. She scented his blood on the air but couldn’t see it.
Though she’d begged him to teach her how to fight, her dad would only show her how to punch. He said learning anything more was unladylike but did feel that she should know how to defend herself at least a little.
She’d never hit anyone out of anger before, and while she was still stunned by the action and her hand throbbed a little, she couldn’t deny it felt good. The bastard deserved it.
This time, she was the one who smiled smugly.
“Okay,” he muttered in a more nasally tone. “I’ll give you that one. But only that one. Don’t try it again.”
She almost asked him what would happen if she did try it again, but she decided not to test her luck by pushing him further. He may need her, but he was far more powerful, and he could hurt her.
“Do they know my name?” she asked in a low whisper that wouldn’t carry to the others.
“No.” Orin lowered his hands to reveal his swollen nose. He wiped away the trickle of blood seeping from one of his nostrils. “Your identity will remain hidden from them.”
“They’re on my land.”
“They don’t know that. We’ve been running so long that even the immortals have no idea where we are anymore. And the forgetting potion will erase any memories they might have of how they got here.”
She despised him, but she believed him when he promised her this. He needed her help, and he would keep her protected while that remained true. What would happen afterward, she didn’t know, but he could destroy her now, so it didn’t matter.
Lexi plastered on a smile and turned to the fugitives. She did not feel like smiling as her stomach churned and her mind spun with all the ramifications of her actions, but she couldn’t turn them away. She would never sleep again if she did.
“My name is Andi,” she said with false cheeriness.
When she was a young girl, her father would sometimes call her Andi in a cute little rhyming game he made up. She recalled sitting on his lap and giggling while he tickled her and sang, “Andi Pandy smells like pickles and candy.”
She pushed aside the grief that came with the memory as she continued speaking. “I’m going to help you.”
It may be the worst decision she ever made, but the second the words left her mouth, the helplessness she’d experienced since the destruction of the marketplace vanished. She’d chosen a different side than her father, but he would have been so proud of her for doing it.
“Please, follow me. I’ll take you somewhere safe,” she promised as she led them into the shed.
Cole took his father’s king as he declared, “Checkmate.”
And it was about time. They’d played hundreds of matches over the past week and a half, and this was the first he’d won. He’d never been one for chess, but after days of being stuck in these small rooms, with windows as their only access to the outside world, he was becoming better at the game.
He’d also become better at rummy and keeping his building rage restrained.
It took everything he had not to launch to his feet and pace the small room containing only the gaming table and two chairs. No decorations hung on the walls, no fire crackled in the hearth, and the only door out was locked.
The place looked exactly like what it was… a prison.
Cole resisted pummeling the gray stone walls of the palace as he demanded to be released. However, he would not give the Lord the satisfaction of seeing him break, so he followed his father’s lead of cool indifference while plotting the many ways he’d kill the Lord.
When the messenger showed them to this room, he told them they were the Lord’s guests before he closed and locked the door behind them. Neither he nor his father ever said anything out loud to acknowledge it, but they were inmates.
So, they passed the time by discussing the realms' mundane politics and the games they played. His father never brought up Lexi, and Cole knew it was because he also sought to keep her secret from the Lord.
This was the Lord’s palace, and even if they couldn’t see any hearing device, Cole was certain they were somehow being listened to. They maintained an air of nonchalance as the days slipped past. He hoped they were boring their eavesdroppers to death.
Outside their tower prison, the dragons roamed the skies while inside it, their bellows reverberated around the stone rooms. Their incessant noise was grating on Cole’s last nerve.
“Nice match,” his father murmured.
“You weren’t paying attention.”
His father smiled. “You caught me.”
Cole rose and stretched his back before walking over to the window. Cool air drifted through the opening in the stone wall as he stopped before it. The circular tower was at least a thousand feet in the air, which gave him a fantastic view of the Dragonian realm.
Despite the dragon’s penchant for destroying everything they came across in the other realms, the fields surrounding the palace were lush and green. Stretching toward the mountains were numerous hills and valleys that rolled across the landscape.
The brilliant yellow sun sparkled off the glistening lake nestled outside the palace's colossal stone walls while dozens of other lakes dotted the land. This beautiful realm belonged to the dragons who soared through the air and swooped toward the earth and mountains.
There were hundreds of them, and they filled the sky with more abundance than the birds on Earth. And they were far, far more lethal.
The distant mountains were a different story than the lushness of the land. Their rocky surfaces stretched so high that many of their peaks obscured the pink clouds floating across the purple sky.
For the first few days, he’d believed those mountains were snow-topped. On the fourth day, he’d studied the scenery far more intently. It was then he realized it wasn’t snow but thousands, if not millions, of bones littering those peaks.
The dragons were ravenous creatures.
One of them roared as it soared past the tower. It turned to the side, exposing its underbelly as it released a cry that some of its fellow destroyers echoed. The flap of its wings blew Cole’s hair back and ruffled his wrinkled and dirty clothes.
The dragon was making it clear they were not to attempt an escape. They couldn’t fly, but with the dark fae’s ability to control air currents, they might be able to navigate their way down.
Although, their feet would never touch the ground before one of those dragons ate them. That knowledge was a bit of an escape deterrent.
If only there were some way we could harness the dragon’s power and use it for our side. We could defeat the Lord then.
He tried to figure out a way to do this while watching the magnificent, vicious beasts, but he kept running up against a wall. The dragons were bound to this land and the power of the throne. Since the destruction of all the arachs, the dragons only followed whoever sat on that corrupting throne.
There were no arach left in this land, but immortals from other realms had moved here. The houses of those immortals dotted the landscape, and many of them wandered the roads. They approached or left the massive golden gates set into the towering, gray stone wall surrounding the palace.
Two dragons sat atop the golden gate. They eyed every immortal who entered and exited the courtyard. Most immortals ignored them, but a few cast them anxious glances before walking a little faster.
Cole rested his hand against the cool wall and glanced at the doorway to the small bedroom he’d taken after arriving here. His father had settled into the room across from his. Both rooms were sparsely furnished with only a bed and a small sink and toilet.
There was no shower, and though they were provided food, they weren’t given clean clothes. They also weren’t offered the sexual sustenance dark fae required, but Cole was glad for that.
He wouldn’t partake even if partners arrived for them, and his celibacy would only pique the Lord’s curiosity. And no matter what happened, the Lord could not know about Lexi. He would use her against Cole if he did.
Neither of them complained about their confines or showed their mounting frustration as each day passed, but it was only a matter of time before one of them lost their patience.
The Lord of the Shadow Realms ruled over all immortals, but his father was king of the dark fae, and no one had ever treated him with such blatant disrespect before and survived. However, there was little either of them could do about it while they remained locked away.
If they banged on the door and demanded to be released, they would only give the Lord the satisfaction of seeing them break. But they’d still be trapped here.
No, there was nothing either of them could do except play their games and act as if none of this bothered them. Their nonchalant attitude was probably infuriating the crazy bastard, which was the only bonus to this whole thing.
As he stared across the verdant land, Cole pondered how to get word to Lexi somehow, but he saw no way to reach her. By now, she probably assumed the worst and believed he wasn’t returning. He couldn’t blame her if she did, but she’d filled his thoughts over the passing days.
Was she safe? The possibility the Lord had unleashed another attack on Earth, and maybe her manor, caused him to toss and turn all night, as did the memory of her in his arms.
His hunger was increasing daily, and those memories only enflamed it, but they also helped him get through the days. Once they were free, he would return to her, which was the only thing keeping him calm.
There was also Malakai. Had he returned for her?
Without him there to force Malakai away, she was far more vulnerable to that prick. A snarl curled his upper lip before he suppressed it. He couldn’t think about Malakai or the possibility Lexi was in trouble; he’d lose his shit if he did.
Boredom, frustration, and barely contained fury had been his constant companions since arriving here, but he’d somehow managed to keep the lycan part of himself restrained. He couldn’t lose control of it now. That’s exactly what the Lord wanted.
“How about some poker?” his father suggested.
Cole turned toward him as a click sounded in the door. Both their heads shot toward it as a key turned. A second later, the door swung open to reveal the same messenger who had escorted them from the Gloaming.
“The Lord will see you now,” the man said.
Cole exchanged a look with his father, and then Tove smiled as he rose from his chair. He smoothed out his shirt and pants before striding toward the messenger. The warlock’s eyes flickered nervously as Tove approached him, but he lifted his chin.
“Of course,” his father said with an airy tone that belied the rage simmering beneath his surface.
Cole matched his dad’s laid-back demeanor as he followed him from the room. They swept through the enclosed, gray stone hallway before arriving at a set of stairs. Those stairs spiraled down the middle of a circular opening that descended to the main entrance ten floors below.
Like the hallway, the walls here were all barren and lacked any color. He’d heard that when the arach who once ruled this land still lived here, the palace was alive with color, noise, parties, the arach, and other immortals, but none of that remained.
One of the mad Lords had stripped all the tapestries, rugs, and paintings from the palace and burned them in the courtyard. Now, not only was the place bleak, but it was also as hushed as a tomb.
There was no banister for the stairs, so they stayed close to the wall as they descended. Their footsteps echoing off the stone was the only sound until a dragon released a roar from somewhere within the palace. That roar reverberated off the walls and rebounded incessantly around them.
The hair on Cole’s nape rose, but he kept his face impassive as they arrived on the first floor. The messenger led them down a hallway filled with statues of golden dragons situated in various positions.
Some of the statues had the ill-fated arach posed beside them. He suspected the only reason these statues survived the purge of all the other decorations was because they looked like they weighed a ton.
Cole examined the statues as they passed. It had been a thousand years since the last arach ruled the Shadow Realms and Dragonia. He’d never met an arach, but his father had known them and would sometimes tell stories of them.
Besides controlling the dragons, the powerful arach could withstand being burned by flames, throw fire from their hands, and cast spells like witches. Some of those spells remained on this palace as they blocked vampires from teleporting out.
No vampire could teleport into a residence, even if they were invited in at some point, but they could all teleport out unless something stopped them. And here, the lingering power of the arachs kept them trapped.
The arachs weaved a potent brand of magic, but despite their many powers, they were now the cautionary tale many children heard at bedtime and many rulers tried to avoid becoming.
The long-lost rulers of the dragons looked like most other immortal creatures. They didn’t have wings like the pixies and didn’t shapeshift like the lycan, but they had fangs like vampires, and if the statues were any indication, they had the arrogant stance of an immortal sure of their place in this world.
They shouldn’t have been so confident as that place no longer existed.
His father once told him that in the beginning, the arach were a rather peaceful species. Still, disagreements on how to rule the Shadow Realms resulted in a civil war that dethroned the original ruling family and sent them into exile.
But the war didn’t end there, and eventually, all the powerful creatures destroyed each other.
That war nearly destroyed the Shadow Realms when it spilled out of Dragonia. The dragons wreaked havoc throughout the realms as the arach battled to the death.
When the dust settled and nothing remained of the arach, their once-tamed dragons ran wild throughout the realms. His father once told him they’d believed they were all doomed. They’d managed to kill some of the dragons, but there were far too many, and the realms were falling apart.
However, when the first non-arach ruler sat on the throne, the dragons returned to Dragonia. That was when the immortals learned whoever held the throne controlled the beasts.
It didn’t take them long to realize that whoever held the throne couldn’t handle its power, and it eventually eroded their sanity until they became a corrupted, broken version of their old selves.
The first ruler had only taken the throne on a whim. The warlock entered Dragonia in the hopes of avoiding the dragons now living in the other realms. He’d been lured by the power of the throne and decided to sit on it. That decision was the turning point in the war against the dragons as his presence on the throne called them back to Dragonia.
That warlock went from a peace-loving man to one consumed by the paranoia that others were trying to kill him. He became determined to stop his imaginary assassins before they stopped him and set the dragons free again. That mistake cost him. He was dethroned by a lycan who moved in for the kill while the dragons were gone.
The lycan ascended to power only to suffer the same fate.
The messenger stopped outside a set of immense double doors. Each door held the carving of a dragon in midflight. The dragons’ tails curled before them, and their wings spread open as fire erupted from their mouths.
Almost everything within this place was drab, but these dragons were a splash of vivid, detailed color amid all the gray. The fire looked so real it seemed it would burn his fingers if he touched it. The rubies in their eyes gleamed in the rays of the sun streaming through the windows. The emeralds of their green scales cast green color across the floor.
The messenger pulled both doors open and stepped back. He gestured for them to enter the enormous, grand hall. It was at least the size of two football fields long and another football field wide. The room was so large that the throne on the other end, and the man sitting on it, were barely discernible.
Half a dozen dragons lounged inside the room. They were coiled up with their tails near their heads as they dozed contentedly in the sun streaming down on them.
When the doors opened, the dragon closest to them cracked its yellow eyes open and lifted its head. The spikes along its back rose before settling in a wave. Then it opened its colossal jaws and released a yawn that displayed its hundreds of razor-sharp teeth.
It settled its head on its front paws and closed its eyes, but Cole knew it remained focused on them. And though none of the other slumbering beasts stirred, he was certain they were aware of their presence.
His father plastered on a smile before descending the five steps to the great hall. Cole swiftly followed.
Their boots thudded against the stone as they strode toward the throne at the end of the hall. Overhead, a domed ceiling arched a thousand feet above them. Black scorch marks surrounded the opening in the middle of it.
That opening revealed the clear blue sky beyond. Then the sun shining through vanished as a dragon soared overhead.
They were halfway to the throne when the dragon in front of them unfurled from its sleeping position and rose onto its hind legs. His father’s footsteps didn’t falter as the dragon bellowed, spread its wings, and launched off the ground.
Its wings made a loud, thumping sound, and the wind it created blew back their hair and plastered their clothes to them. It was nearly free of the hall when it released a blast of fire that charred the stones before it disappeared into the day.
Cole hid his apprehension, but he looked forward to getting out of this room and away from these nearly unstoppable killing machines.
“Tove!” the Lord exclaimed when they were twenty feet away. “How good to see you! I hope you didn’t mind waiting, but I’ve been so busy that it took me far longer to get to you than I anticipated.”
“Of course not, my Lord,” his father replied.
They stopped only five feet away from the dais the throne sat on. The Lord sat fifteen feet above them.
“The wait allowed my son and I to work on his chess game. Besides, I needed a little vacation from the Gloaming,” his father continued.
“That’s why I like you, Tove. You’re always so easygoing.” The Lord steepled his fingers before him as he studied Tove. “The pressures of leadership are such a bore.”
“They can be rather tedious.”
The Lord’s hazel eyes gleamed with malice as his mouth twisted in amusement. His brown hair hung to his broad shoulders in limp strands. The sharp angles of his face made the contours of his skull evident.
They were so close Cole could almost smell the Lord’s blood on his hands. If he could get his hands on him, Cole could slaughter him. It was the getting his hands on him part that was tricky.
As he contemplated how he could kill the Lord before being eaten by a dragon, the gold-colored beast behind the throne lifted its head. Dragons couldn’t read minds, but when the creature’s green eyes locked on him, it slipped its tail around the throne like it was embracing the Lord.
The Lord leaned forward, and when he did, he provided a better view of the throne. The gold back of it was composed of two dragons with their wings spread wide. Behind the Lord’s shoulders, those dragon heads nearly touched, and their tails created the seat holding a red cushion.
“I suppose you’re curious as to why I wish to speak with you,” the Lord said.
“I admit that I am,” Tove replied.
Cole stiffened when a shuffling sound alerted him that a dragon was moving behind him. Though he wanted to know what was happening, he didn’t look. He refused to let the Lord think these creatures unnerved him, even if they could swallow him like a frog with a fly.
“I’m hearing rumors about a growing rebellion,” the Lord said.
“I’m sure they’re just rumors, my Lord. The rebellion is broken, and the traitors are running,” Tove replied. “As we speak, they are relentlessly hunted across the realms. I’m sure it’s only a matter of time before they’re all found and destroyed.”
“Now you see, that’s where I have a problem. I don’t want it to be a matter of time. They should all be dead by now, including your sons.”
The Lord’s tone dripped venom, and his eyes shone with a malevolence the likes of which Cole had never seen. Cole glanced at his father as he sensed an unraveling in the monster sitting across from them.
“Varo and Orin are also being hunted as we speak,” Tove replied. “I’m sure someone will find them soon.”
“And if they’re not?”
“Then I will personally help to hunt them down. I want all traitors persecuted as badly as you. I have two loyal sons who fought by my side and for you. That is enough for me.”
The lie rolled so easily off his father’s lips that Cole almost believed it. The Lord’s gaze shifted to Cole.
“Yes, and here is one of those loyal sons,” the Lord purred.
“Loyal to my father, to you, and the cause,” Cole replied. “I had just returned from the human realm, where I was tracking Orin when you summoned us here.”
“And did you have any luck in locating your brother?”
“No, but I did uncover a couple of leads. Unfortunately, my brother Brokk and I were ambushed by traitors before following through on those leads. Brokk was badly injured. However, I plan to return to hunting Orin and Varo as soon as I can.”
And, he planned on making sure they stayed out of the Lord’s hands once he found them.
“Wonderful,” the Lord said and settled back on his throne. “Because some of those rumors claim that Orin is the one gathering more recruits for the rebellion.”
Cole’s blood ran cold. He wanted to look at his father, but he didn’t dare take his eyes off this madman for one second.
“I’m sure they’re rumors, my Lord,” his father demurred. “But if not, then we will stop such a thing before it ever gets started.”
The Lord didn’t look at him as his gaze remained focused on Cole. “Oh, I’m sure I can count on you not to fail me.”
“Of course, my Lord,” Cole said.
“Because no matter how close they are, brothers always secretly hate each other. That hatred is ingrown into them. They compete for their parents’ love and, in doing so, they grow to loathe one another.”
Orin, Varo, Brokk, and all his brothers had pissed him off countless times over the years, but even when they were pummeling each other, he’d never hated them. Not even when his impetuous, stubborn brothers joined the rebellion did he hate them.
He’d grieved their deaths, and still did, but he wasn't going to correct the Lord. He’d let the crazy prick think he hated his brothers if it made him happier.
“Unfortunately, no matter what a child does to its parent, that parent still retains some love for them. Isn’t that true, Tove?” the Lord inquired.
An uneasy feeling twisted in Cole’s stomach. He did not like the direction this conversation was taking.
His father hesitated before replying. “I love all my children, yes, but my loyalty is to you. Orin and Alvaro chose the wrong path and will face the consequences of their actions.”
“That they will,” the Lord agreed. “But I must question if you’ll help them escape when the time comes.”
“I would never help them escape, my Lord,” Tove said.
Cole’s uneasy feeling grew, and this time, he couldn’t stop his gaze from traveling to the dragons. Two of the beasts had crept closer and were only ten feet away.
He contemplated grabbing his father and running from this place, but the dragons would never let them go.
“I want to believe you, Tove, I really do. However, though I have no children, I know the bond between a parent and their child is special. I do recall the love of my parents; my mother died to keep me alive,” the Lord said.
Cole wished his mother hadn’t been so selfless.
“I assure you, my Lord, that I would hand over any traitor, son or not,” Tove replied.
The Lord tapped his fingers against his chin and stared down at them. “I truly want to believe you, but I can’t. Kill him.”
Cole had just processed the command when the dragon closest to them surged forward. With a snap of its powerful jaws, it consumed the top half of his father’s body. Blood sprayed over Cole. His father had to be in serious pain, but he didn’t make a sound when the dragon chomped down again.
Cole twisted his head away when the next snap of those jaws caused another wave of hot blood to spray him. And then the dragon swallowed.
It took a few seconds for the full impact of what happened to hit him. In that time, Cole became acutely aware of the blood sliding down his face and dripping off his chin. Each drop hitting the gray stone floor sounded like a gunshot fired inside a steel room.
His head slowly turned back to where he last saw the father he loved so much. In the place of the man who’d been his dad, mentor, and best friend was only a pool of red liquid.
The man who broke through his unbearable grief over the loss of Cole’s mother and saved a lost boy who was drowning in his sorrow was gone. The man who, for a month after his mother’s death, had come into Cole’s room every night when he woke crying.
When Cole proved to be inconsolable, his father would carry him into his room and settle him in his bed. Nestled against his dad’s side, Cole would finally fall asleep again.
Over the following five months, his dad didn’t bother to put him in his room first but simply let him sleep beside him from the night's start. Cole had outgrown such things, but he still recalled those nights and the love sheltering him even after his mother’s love was gone.
His father was as broken by her death, but his love for Cole triumphed over his sorrow. During those troubled days, he nursed his son back to life while a part of him remained dead forever.
Then Cole’s shock and grief wore off, and a white-hot fury the likes of which he’d never known erupted through him. It was so intense that his claws lengthened and his fangs extended as the lycan broke free in a way it never had before.
He launched himself at the dragon. The creature reared back as Cole sank his claws into its throat. The dragon’s eyes rolled as Cole sawed at the wall of muscle surrounding its throat. The beast’s teeth snapped as it twisted its head to get at him, but Cole was wedged up beneath its head and out of the way of its powerful jaws.
“Stand down!” the Lord bellowed, but Cole barely heard the command, and he didn’t obey it.
Animalistic snarls filled the room, and it took him a couple of seconds to realize those sounds were coming from him. However, they were not enough to deter him. He was lost to the mindlessness of the wolf and the thirst for vengeance.
The dragon swiveled enough that teeth raked his arm. He ignored the agony and blood those teeth created as he hacked through sinew as thick as steel. Warm breath plumed against his back as the dragon twisted its head to snap at him.
Smoke burst from its nostrils, and seconds before it released a plume of fire, Cole slid to the side to avoid it. He was too lost in the bloodlust of the lycan to be concerned about those flames. The dragon’s fire blasted against its neck but didn’t leave a mark on its flesh.
The blood soaking Cole dripped off and filled his mouth as he slashed through the monster’s flesh. The metallic liquid caked his nostrils until he could barely breathe, but he continued to avoid the dragon’s jaws while seeking to destroy the monster.
Around him, the slithering sounds of the others barely penetrated the beat of his heart rebounding in his ears.
“That is enough!” the Lord shouted. “Stay back!”
The command rebounded throughout the great hall, but Cole barely heard it as the dragon’s movements grew sluggish and its head tilted at a funny angle. Then its powerful jaws sank onto his arm and clamped down.
The pain the bite created only fueled his desire to destroy as he sank the claws of his free hand into the gap he’d made in the beast’s neck. His flesh gave way as the dragon’s teeth scoured his bone.
As the creature sought to tear his arm from him, Cole lifted upward with his free hand. Sinew and skin gave way, and a hissing scream issued from the dragon as he tore the thing’s neck upward.
Bone cracked and popped as a rending sound filled the air. The dragon bit down harder as its blood spilled over him.
Cole continued to pull upward until he severed its spinal cord and it couldn’t hold onto him any longer. The dragon released its grip on his arm seconds before Cole succeeded in tearing its head the rest of the way off.
When the dragon’s head fell to the ground with a wet thump, Cole released it and dropped down. His shoulders heaved as he spun on the Lord.
With a snarl, Cole stepped toward the Lord. He was about to rush up the steps of the dais, but the dragon behind the throne had slid its head in front of the Lord while Cole destroyed its friend.
Its face was only inches away from Cole’s. Its hot breath blew Cole’s hair back from his face when it bared its lethal, six-inch-long teeth at him.
Then he felt the hot breaths of the others and realized they’d all enclosed on him. He didn’t turn to look at the monsters, but if the hate in the eyes of the one guarding the Lord was any indication, they were all pretty pissed.
None of them were as irate as him.
“Uh-ah.” The Lord wagged his index finger at Cole like he was some kind of recalcitrant toddler throwing a tantrum.
It only enraged him more. His shoulders heaved, his muscles swelled, and his fangs filled his mouth as his breath came in ragged exhalations. His claws bit into his palms until his blood spilled free; it mixed with his father’s and the dragon’s while he glowered at the monster before him.
He might be able to kill this one too, but the others would be on him before he reached the Lord. A big part of him didn’t give a fuck if he died trying to slaughter this prick. The other part told him he had to live to fight another day.
If he died here and the Lord survived, Lexi would be vulnerable. And he could not leave her unprotected in a world where this monster ruled.
If he could get to this monster and kill him, he would do it because it would keep her safer. However, he had no shot of succeeding. He’d managed to kill one dragon; he would not be able to battle his way through them all.
“Such a pity,” the Lord said as his gaze fell on the slaughtered dragon. “She was one of my favorites.” Then his attention returned to Cole, and a sly smile curved his mouth. “But very impressive. I don’t think anyone has ever singlehandedly killed a dragon before.”
Cole didn’t speak as blood dripped off him to splatter on the ground.
“I should kill you for doing that to one of my babies. Her friends certainly want you dead, but you are of far more use to me alive.”
The Lord stopped and stared expectantly at him, but Cole still didn’t speak. If this lunatic gave the command to kill him, he planned to take out a few more of these monsters before he went.
“I bet you’re thinking I’ve made a big enemy out of you and the dark fae,” the Lord said.
Silence.
“Normally, I would say you’re right, but you’re wrong here. Your father’s arrogance got him killed, as did his lies. He never planned to hand his sons over to me, but you’ll have no qualms about doing so. You will not become my enemy, Cole, and do you know why?”
Cole kept his mouth shut as he eyed the dragons slithering around him. They were eager for his blood, but they didn’t strike.
“Because if you become my enemy, countless dark fae will die. Do you understand me?”
He still didn’t speak.
“Do not eat him, my friends,” the Lord said and rubbed the back of the one protecting his throne. “If he decides not to play nice, you can have him, but that’s not going to happen because he’s going to be one of our best friends.”
Cole’s jaw clenched as images of tearing this bastard’s head off and dancing around it filled his mind.
“Now,” the Lord said as he steepled his hands before his face, “you’re going to go back to the Gloaming, and as the eldest prince, you’re going to take control of the dark fae. I know you’re only a half-breed and you will have to endure the trials, but you will rule them.
“If you survive the trials, some will fight your rise to the throne, but that’s not my problem. You will get the dark fae to fall in line, or I’ll destroy the Gloaming. You will be my greatest ally, or I will label the dark fae as traitors and hunt them across the realms. Do you understand me?”
Cole scowled at him. Before this was over, he would make sure this thing was nothing more than pieces of meat strewn across the ground for his dragons. And then, he would slaughter all the dragons.
The Lord’s eyes flicked past him, and a second later, a rush of hot air billowed against Cole’s nape as a dragon exhaled behind him.
“Do you understand me?” the Lord repeated.
Cole didn’t bother to look at the dragon, who was so close its nose brushed his skin, as he replied through gritted teeth, “Yes.”
“Good, because it is time that all the leaders of the realms learn I am not fucking around, and they are all replaceable. They will do as I say. You will do as I say, or I’ll kill them all.”
He was crazier than Cole realized, and as the hot breath of the dragon continued to warm his neck, a chill ran through him.
“You just killed the king of the dark fae,” Cole snarled. “The fae will not be excited to obey you.”
“And I have crowned you the new king, and you should have no problem with making them fall in line.”
There would be a huge problem. The dark fae had admired his father and followed him because he was powerful, fair, and quick to eradicate his enemies. They wouldn’t have such faith in Cole, and they were going to be pissed the Lord had destroyed their king.
But even with all their powers, and even if they got help from the other immortals, they couldn’t defeat the dragons. And there would be some who were glad Tove was dead; they would come for him and Brokk and try to destroy them.
The Lord had no idea the unrest he’d unleashed on the Gloaming by killing its king. If Cole couldn’t keep the realm together, it would crumble into civil war, just like Dragonia once did.
“Do you understand?” the Lord demanded.
Cole started to tell him where he could shove his declarations, but when an image of Lexi entered his mind, he bit back the words. He had to return to make sure she was safe, and he had to let the other coalition members know what happened here. He couldn’t do those things if he were dead.
“Yes,” Cole growled.
The Lord grinned at him. “Good boy. Now, run along.”
He waved his fingers at Cole as he shooed him away like an errant puppy. When Cole got the chance, he’d tear those fingers off and shove them up the Lord’s ass.
Cole turned to look at the puddle of his father’s blood again. It had mixed with the blood of the dragon, but it was still there beneath the dragon’s head. Sorrow swelled to repress his rage, and then it burned hotly through him again.
“Don’t worry, I’ll make sure it’s cleaned up,” the Lord said. “Now, do as you were commanded and leave my hall, or I’ll let my dragon eat one of your arms. I’m sure you couldn’t survive the trials without it.”
Though Cole only knew a little of what the trials entailed, it would be impossible to survive without it.
He bent and lifted the dragon’s head from the ground. “I’m taking this with me.”
“And if I say no?”
“You can say whatever you want, but if you want the dark fae to fall in line, then I’m taking the fucking head.”
Cole didn’t look back at him as he turned away. It took more willpower than he’d known he possessed to leave his father’s remains. He wanted to gather what remained of the man he’d loved so much, but he had nothing to carry the blood in. However, not having a body to entomb beside his mother and brothers weighed heavily on his heart.
He met the eyes of the dragon behind him over the top of the thick scales lining its snout. Hatred glistened in those yellow eyes, but it was nothing compared to what Cole felt for these beasts.
“Let him pass,” the Lord commanded, and after a few seconds, the dragon reluctantly slithered away.
Cole’s feet thudded against the floor as he strode down the hall and past the beasts. Hatred swelled in him as he sneered at the massive creatures, but none of them paid any attention to him as he stalked past.
With every step he took, his claws dug deeper into his palm while his other hand carried the dragon’s head. If he didn’t have this self-inflicted injury to keep him grounded in this form, Cole would transform completely, and if he did, he would go back for the Lord, and he would die.
Lexi! Thoughts of her helped to keep him grounded more than the pain, and for a second, the faint scent of strawberries pushed aside the coppery stench of the blood coating him.
The messenger still waited by the doors, and when Cole walked through them, the warlock closed them with a click. When Cole’s head turned stiffly toward the man, he discovered the warlock staring at the wall with a blank expression on his face.
Do not kill him. But it was so tempting.
His claws scraped against the bones in his hand as he compelled himself to keep walking. He didn’t look back as he strode to the front door. A servant opened it for him, and Cole walked outside.
The warm sun beat down on him, but he didn’t see anything as he descended the steps and stalked out of the palace courtyard. As if he were a homing pigeon returning home, he found the Gloaming portal and entered it.
Once inside the protective, black walls of the portal, he slid his parents’ rings from his pocket, put them in his mouth, and started running. He only made it three steps before the wolf took over.
His clothing ripped and fell away. His muscles and bones shifted and popped as he transformed into the beast he’d kept repressed for centuries. The dragon’s bite ached and he limped, but he ignored both discomforts as he threw the head of the dragon into the air and caught it in his jaws.
Over the years, he’d transformed only a handful of times, and all those times were before he turned thirty. He tried to become comfortable in the wolf’s skin during those times, but he hated the lack of control he experienced when the wolf was in charge.
The dark fae were known for their control and aloofness; nothing was controlled or reserved about the beast. It was wild, free, and ruled by the emotions the dark fae rarely displayed.
Now, he welcomed the loss of control as the wind whipped through his hair, and he was driven by an incessant compulsion to run faster. He couldn’t escape what happened in the hall, but some of his fury and sorrow eased as he gave himself over to the freedom of the wolf’s run.
Then he spotted a small glow at the end of the portal and emerged into the Gloaming. He didn’t slow or return to his fae form as he ran up and down hills, past homesteads, and through fields full of crops.
As a fae, he was aware of his senses, but not like when he was a wolf. The scent of blood permeated the air, but beneath it, he detected the earth's rich aroma, the fae wheat crops, and the crisp, night air. His vision was more acute as a wolf, and he spotted the tiny rodents darting back into the ground when he approached.
The sun had set, but the silvery radiance of the moons lit his way across an open field. His paws kicked up dirt that bounced off his back legs. The few fae who saw him cried out in surprise, but none knew it was him, and none dared to get in the way of a blood-drenched lycan.
He traversed miles, but he wasn't winded or tired when he arrived at the palace. Stopping outside the massive, metal gates, he closed his eyes as he willed himself to transform. It was more difficult than he’d anticipated; the wolf was reluctant to let go of its newfound freedom, but eventually the beast yielded.
Cole dropped the dragon head as his bones and joints popped back into place. He rose from all fours to stare at the closed gates. His hand heated as he wrapped it around the bars. Those bars recognized his touch, and when the lock sprang free, he opened one of the gates.
He lifted the dragon’s head and drove it onto one of the fence spikes. That head would make a lot of the dark fae think twice before challenging him.
He would not let anyone or anything stand in the way of avenging his father’s death. He glowered at the beast that slaughtered his father before turning away.
As he walked toward the towering palace half hidden in shadow, he removed the rings from under his tongue and slid his father’s band onto his ring finger. It was a perfect fit.
His mother’s ring barely made it to the knuckle of his pinky, but he fisted his hand to keep it securely in place there. The movement caused the dragon’s bite to pull taut, but he barely noticed the discomfort.
He didn’t care about his nudity as he strode through the empty courtyard, but he was glad no one was around to see the blood dripping from him. He wasn’t in control enough to answer questions.
He ascended the steps to the large, silver front doors with the four moons etched onto them. Before he reached the doors, one of them swung open to reveal Sindri standing inside the threshold.
The helot’s eyes ran over the blood, sliding down his flesh. Though Cole was barely in control of himself, he’d still managed to keep most of his ciphers hidden. Rage and sorrow could not erase centuries of discipline when it came to concealing the true depth of his power.
His father had drilled it into his head when he was only a young boy that no one could ever know the true number of ciphers on him, and no one did. Just as he didn’t know how many ciphers the other dark fae possessed, including his brothers and father.
Sindri’s eyes flickered behind him, and Cole saw understanding dawn in them a second before a cruel smile curved the man’s lips.
“We have missed you, milord,” he purred. “Where is your father?”
Sindri’s smug smile widened as it ran over Cole once more.
“Or am I looking at him?” Sindri inquired.
Cole’s claws extended, and with lightning speed, he sliced them across the helot’s throat. Sindri’s hands flew to his neck, and he staggered back as blood spilled from between his fingers. Cole didn’t hesitate before slicing into him again.
His next blow caused Sindri’s fingers to fall away; his throat opened enough to reveal his spine's white bone, and Cole seized it. Dawning horror and understanding bloomed in the helot’s gaze a second before Cole snapped the spine in half.
Sindri’s head hit the ground with a wet thud and rolled to settle at his feet. Cole stared at the unseeing eyes and parted mouth before bending to lift the head. He was rising when Sindri’s body hit the ground.
Grasping the helot by his ankle, Cole dragged the body over to the fence and gazed up at the lethal spikes on top. He turned the head to look out on the Gloaming before slamming it onto one of the points. The metal rod burst out the top of Sindri’s head.
He lifted the body next, turned it upside down, and plunged it onto another spike. The metal rod went all the way through Sindri’s body and erupted out the other end. Along with his intestines, Sindri’s testicles remained on top of the spike.
Stepping back, Cole examined the helot’s body as he contemplated his next move. The dark fae would fight his ascension, but he wouldn’t let it happen. He’d endure and survive the trials that killed many before his father, and he would become the king of the dark fae.
And once he was in charge, he didn’t care what it took, he would destroy the Lord of the Shadow Realms.
Lexi and Cole’s story continues in Shadows of Discovery.
Preorder it now and make sure to read on for an excerpt!
Preorder: https://www.brendakdavies.com/project/shadows-of-discovery/
Stay in touch on updates and other new releases from the author by joining the Brenda K. Davies/Erica Stevens Mailing List: brendakdavies.com/ESBKDNews
Join the Erica Stevens/Brenda K. Davies book club on Facebook for exclusive giveaways, to discuss books, and join in the fun with the author and fellow readers!
Book Club: brendakdavies.com/ESBKDBookClub
Shadows of Discovery excerpt
(The Shadow Realms, Book 2.
Cole left bloody footprints behind him as he stalked up the palace steps toward the open doorway. A shadow fell across the stairs a second before Brokk skidded to a stop in the entrance. His aqua blue eyes widened, and his jaw dropped when he spotted Cole.
“Cole? Holy shit! What happened to you?”
Then his gaze went past Cole, and his eyes roamed over the pathway leading to the gate and fence surrounding the fae palace. Cole knew he was searching for their father, but he wouldn’t find him.
When Brokk’s eyes returned to him, dawning horror filled them as they ran over Cole’s naked body and the blood covering him. It was the blood of their father mixed with that of a dragon.
“What happened?” Brokk croaked the words out. “Where’s… where’s father?”
Then his gaze went past Cole again, and his jaw dropped. He’d finally seen the body of their ex-helot, Sindri, and the dragon head Cole had staked to the fence.
“Is that a dragon head? And Sindri?” Brokk’s eyes shot back to Cole. “What the fuck happened?”
“The Lord ordered a dragon to kill father.”
Brokk blinked at him, but Cole’s words didn’t seem to register as he stared at the bloody remains sticking to the fence.
“Why?” Brokk whispered.
“Because he didn’t think he would do enough to hunt Orin and Varo. He thinks I will do more. He intends for me to rule after I survive the trials.”
Cole did not say if he survived the trials. He didn’t care that many dark fae had failed to survive the trials. He. Would. Not. Fail. He would become the king of the dark fae and destroy the Lord of the Shadow Realms if it was the last thing he did.
Brokk didn’t speak as he stared unblinkingly at the fence. Tears brimmed in his eyes, but he didn’t shed them.
Cole knew Brokk’s tears would come with time, and so would his, but right now, the horror of what happened to their father was hitting him. And though there was grief, there was also a fury so hot that it burned away the sorrow and left nothing but ashes in its wake.
“Where did the dragon head come from?” Brokk asked.
“I killed it, and I took it as a warning to all those who will think to stand in my way of claiming the throne.”
If his brother’s eyes got any bigger, they would pop out of his head. “You killed it by yourself?”
“Yes.”
“How… how did you manage that?”
Cole still wasn’t entirely sure how he’d managed to destroy the powerful creature and could only think of one answer. “Rage.”
“And you killed Sindri because…?”
“He was happy to see me wearing father’s blood.”
“That would do it.”
As Cole finished climbing the stairs, Brokk stepped back to let him enter the palace.
“Where are you going?” Brokk demanded.
“To see Lexi.”
“Who?” And then Brokk’s mind seemed to start working again, and he blurted. “Del’s daughter?”
“Yes.”
“You’re going to see her now?”
“Yes.”
“There are a thousand things that will have to be taken care of; why would you go see her now?”
“Because I have to.”
The door slammed shut behind him, and then the padding sound of Brokk’s soft boots sounded against the stone as he hurried after him. Cole didn’t look back at his brother as he navigated the palace halls toward his room.
He’d spent his entire life within these walls, and during that time, he’d passed the numerous closed doors that would never open to him. Those rooms belonged to others, and they would not open to anyone but them, even if they were dead.
He wondered if the palace would seal off his father’s room now, too; a pang broke through his rage to pierce his heart, but he swiftly buried it. This was not the time or place; he had to see Lexi then meet with the dark fae council and arrange to start the trials.
Once that was settled and the trials were over, he would use his power to help him find a way to sink his claws into the Lord and rip him to pieces. He would celebrate as that bastard’s blood covered him.
“Cole.” Brokk reached for his arm, but blood coated him so thickly that his brother hesitated before lowering his hand without touching him. “The fae council is going to descend on this palace as soon as they learn of father’s death.”
“I know.”
“They won’t want either of us ruling. We’re only half breeds.”
“They’re not going to have a choice.”
“Great. Fantastic. Glad to hear you say that because I’d really like to kill the Lord, and we’re going to need the power of the fae throne behind us to help with that, but if you’re not here when they arrive, then what? I don’t want to throw myself in the ring as I want nothing to do with ruling the Gloaming.”
“I know.”
“You never wanted to rule it either.”
“I still don’t.”
“Then—”
“I don’t have a choice either. I am going to rule because if I don’t, the Lord is going to destroy us all,” Cole interrupted. “I will rule because I’m going to fucking kill that prick if it’s the last thing I do. But I have to see Lexi first.”
“Cole—”
Brokk stopped speaking and took a startled step back when Cole spun on him. “She’s my mate, Brokk. She’s mine, and I am going to see her. If the council shows up here before I return, then you will have to stall them. I don’t care how you do it. Just do it.”
Brokk gawked at him, and this time when Cole walked away from him, it was a few seconds before his brother scrambled to catch up again.
“Your mate as in your lycan mate?” Brokk demanded when he arrived at Cole’s side again.
“Yes.”
“Holy shit. Why didn’t you say something? I could have checked on her.”
“I wasn’t expecting to be gone so long.” Or to come back soaked in his father’s blood. “I didn’t expect any of this.”
And he’d certainly never expected to watch his father die, to be forced to endure the trials, rule the Gloaming, or have the Lord breathing down his neck about his rebellious brothers. He hadn’t expected to leave Lexi for nearly two weeks when he walked away from her manor.
Because of his dark fae nature, she probably thought he’d abandoned her, and she had every right to believe that, but he would make sure she learned the truth. And he had to make sure she was safe before starting the trials. He would never get through them if he were worried about her, and there was no way Cole could let her keep thinking that he’d used her and left her.
“Why didn’t you tell me?” Brokk demanded.
“I wasn’t ready.”
Brokk didn’t speak again as Cole continued to his room. He hated the silence that descended because with the silence came the memories, and every room and hallway he ever entered this place contained memories of his father.
His father had walked these halls. He’d ruled over and loved them, just as he’d loved his children. And his children loved him.
With every corner Cole turned, he expected to find his father gliding toward him. A smile would brighten his face when he saw Cole, and his arms would open for a quick embrace and pat on the back.
Tove, King of the dark fae, was a cold and ruthless ruler to the outside world. To his sons, he was a man who was loved, and they loved him in return.
Cole fingered the rings his father gave him before everything went to shit. The rings once belonged to his father and mother, and now they were his. And he hoped that one day Lexi would wear his mother’s.
But that was an obstacle for a later time. Now, Cole just had to see her, to make sure she was safe, and return here to take control of the Gloaming.
He sneered at the reminder. He never thought anything would ever happen to his father. The man had ruled these lands for over seven hundred years; he was ruler before Cole was born. He’d been the longest-running dark fae king, and in a moment… just one, lightning-fast, hideous fucking moment, he was gone.
Cole shuddered as some of his rage ebbed, and the grief crept back in again. Except, he had no time for grief.
He had trials to survive, a throne to ascend, and hell to unleash.